The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Englishwoman's adventures in the
German lines, by Gladys Lloyd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: An Englishwoman's adventures in the German lines

Author: Gladys Lloyd

Release Date: July 7, 2023 [eBook #71135]

Language: English

Credits: MWS, Fiona Holmes and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
         at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
         generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
         Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ENGLISHWOMAN'S ADVENTURES
IN THE GERMAN LINES ***





Transcriber’s Note

Page 13 — Grendarmerie changed to Gendarmerie

Page 83 — govermental changed to governmental




    An Englishwoman’s
    Adventures
    In the German Lines

    By
    Gladys Lloyd


    London
    C. Arthur Pearson Ltd.
    Henrietta Street, W.C.
    1914


    An Englishwoman’s Adventures
    in the German Lines


[Illustration: SKETCH MAP SHOWING POSITION OF PLACES MENTIONED IN THE
NARRATIVE]




Contents


                                   PAGE

    War!                             7

    Getting Ready                   10

    How the Uhlans Came             16

    Anything for Bread              23

    Fiction v. Fact                 25

    The “Terrible” French           28

    Spies Ahoy                      31

    Threatened with Death           34

    To Leave or not to Leave        41

    What the Uhlans think           45

    The Sign of the Red Cross       50

    On the Road                     55

    Rushing the Mails through       61

    A Teuton Feast                  67

    Coals of Fire                   72

    In Danger                       75

    Maps and Mines                  78

    In the Bar                      80

    In the Woods                    82

    Prisoners of War                86

    A Disturbed Night               94

    The Plot Thickens               97

    The March Past                 100

    Arrested!                      104

    “It’s a long, long way——”      109

    Homeward Bound                 120




An Englishwoman’s Adventures in the German Lines




WAR!


“Albert has gone.”

I jump down from the little vicinal (light railway) train, which always
stops so obligingly in Manhay Street opposite the inn, and press Madame
Job’s hand in silent sympathy.

“To Liège?” I ask after a pause.

“He is in the forts, Mademoiselle,” she answers tearfully.

So Madame’s son Albert, the baker, is a soldier too. Well, he will do
his duty like all these Belgians. But who will bake for the countryside?

I greet the young Lepouses, Mademoiselle Irma, the pretty eldest
daughter, the sixteen-year-old Louisa, Messieurs Floribert and Alfred,
the stalwart sons. Last of all, the inn’s proprietor, wrinkled kindly
Monsieur Job. I am introduced to M. le Précepteur,[A] the postmaster,
at the post office, and his wife and children. Together we sit out on
the _terrasse_ and discuss the one and only topic.

[Footnote A: M. le Précepteur is a descendant of the owners of
Hougomont.]

“Caught in the war. A nice ending to my summer’s holiday,” I say
cheerfully.

“You had better return to England to-day—it will be your last chance,”
says a dispatch carrier, a khaki-clad, dusty figure standing before us
in the village street.

“The trains are taken for the soldiers. Besides, I have only Belgian
paper money—unnegotiable now.”

“Walk then.”

“Too far,” I protest.

“Please yourself, Mademoiselle. But in war-time, a little hotel, on a
high road, with the post office opposite and the Gendarmerie next door,
is not the place of residence I should personally choose. Good-bye,
Mademoiselle; good-bye, all. I must be off.”

The dispatch carrier mounts his machine, bends over the handle bars in
best professional style, and is quickly lost to view in a cloud of dust.

We remain chatting out-of-doors for a little while. There is a careworn
look on the faces of the women, a certain quiet determination in
the eyes of the men. I understand. At midnight, in a neighbouring
village, I had heard the dreaded Tocsin sound out the call to arms.
The tones of the harsh, crude bell, mingled with the agonised cries of
sorrow-stricken women. No one slept. Some were helping loved ones to
make their preparations for departure, others were quietly watching
the ceaseless stream of men pass by. Hour after hour they came pouring
into the village from outlying hamlets, summoned by beacon fires from
the surrounding hills. Many paused to admire the long queue of patient,
fly-tormented horses waiting to be shoed by the _maréchal_. In five
hours the last message had been delivered, the last good-bye said. The
men were gone. But the memory of their going is not easily effaced....




GETTING READY


“Les Prussiens, les Prussiens!” These words are uttered in hoarse
whispers under my window while I dress. They send a nervous tremor down
my spine. At breakfast I am informed that the Germans are only a day’s
march distant. They have already crossed the frontier and are advancing
on us. Bombarded Liège is safer than Manhay, situated on one of the
high roads from the frontier. The blindest Teuton could not miss this
short, straight line of white-washed houses.

I join the crowd of peasants standing in a cluster at the cross-roads.
Everyone is busy advising, gesticulating, prophesying. Other peasants
are pouring in from the neighbouring villages for directions and news.
Any stranger at once forms the nucleus of an entranced group. There is
much chattering but little real excitement. These people who live on
the edge of big events are never unprepared.

M. le Précepteur is busy in the post office trying to decipher
governmental wires. Several _malle-postes_, like two-horsed roofed-in
wagonettes, are waiting about, their drivers ready to take round
letters—the last batch, who knows!—to the scattered villages around.
A very small girl, fortified by a very large dog, is deftly steering
back some wandering cows from the direction of Malempré. The village
idiot has been trying to get up a game in the skittle alley, but is
promptly squelched.

Motor-cyclists are coming and going in the direction of Liège. Cars
shoot through every few minutes at a break-neck speed carrying men in
uniform. The Commandant, peaked hat and uniform complete, lolls at the
door of the Gendarmerie. His horse is being walked up and down by a
farmer’s boy.

He disappears into a back room to answer the telephone, but when he
returns he does not impart his news to the gaping crowd. The little
vicinal train puffs noisily down the street from its shed at the end
of the village. The peasants of the 13th and 14th classes, called
up to-day, climb in. They are very workmanlike in their dirty-white
trousers, short belted coat, and “bonnet rond.” They carry necessaries
in a small parcel. How I admire the plucky air of confidence on their
manly faces as they lean over the side of the little car which is to
take them down to the railway ... to Liège ... perhaps to God.

They bend from the train to shake their relatives’ hands with something
of the Commandant’s calm nonchalance. Matters are worse than I
imagined. Men with pitchforks are even being called up to help guard
the frontier. Too late! M. le Directeur is here in a khaki suit. The
brave man. He is about to take dispatches. His motor-cycle needs
petrol. The entire village hurls itself on the machine. We are all
panting to be useful.

“Doucement, doucement, mes braves gens. Ce n’est pas un Allemand.”
(Quietly, my good people! I am not a German), he says, laughing.

The spirit of the peasants obviously delights him. He breaks into a
Walloon song. They all shout the chorus, beating time with their hands.
Then he is off.

One thing is decided on. The magnificent avenues of trees which line
the undulating roads must be decimated to bar the route against the
German troops. To keep them back a few days, a few hours, will be
something. Already knots of villagers in wideawake hats and stout
corduroys are stealing away, axe hooked to shoulder, lengths of rope
coiled round their left arms. They look bored and indifferent, so I
know they will work like demons. A bored-looking Belgian is a man to be
feared.... Soon one hears the steady hack-hack, followed by a swirl and
crash as some huge fir or oak falls prone across the great white road.
There is something about the sound which makes one’s blood run cold. It
comes as a foretaste of death.

A car drives up with four busbied officers. The Belgian guides. The
Commandant speaks to them a moment. They drive on. He re-enters the
Gendarmerie, comes out a moment later, locks the door and casts a
lingering, almost affectionate glance at the yellow, black and red
flag floating proudly from the masthead. He is wondering, perhaps,
if he will ever see it again. Mounting his horse, he waves his hand
to the villagers, and is off on his sixty-mile ride to Arlon. Brave
Commandant of the nonchalant mien, but not brave enough to face those
last good-byes. How I feel for you!

The day wears on. Already the end of the high road where it turns to
Malempré is piled high with trees. The Noah’s-ark firs on the highway
to Bomale have come toppling down like ninepins. My thoughts turn to
weapons. I never dream for an instant but that the peasants will fight
the common enemy from behind those bulwark barricades. It seems the
only natural and proper thing to do. I know nothing of the duties of
non-combatants.

A man from a neighbouring village drives up in his cart. He gets down
and feeds his horse with hunks of black bread which he tears from the
loaf. I feel ashamed not to be armed. He may help. I approach him.

“Have you a spare rifle?” I ask wistfully.

He stares at me stupidly. “A rifle? No,” he says. “Why?”

“I could help to shoot the Germans,” I suggest.

“It’s a pity,” he answers, and his mouth twists in a grin as he turns
back to feed his horse.

I have never held a rifle in my hands. But I feel convinced that the
mere sight of a loathsome Teuton would make the most difficult and
antiquated weapon go off of its own accord.

Madame Job’s little girl, Rosa, was sent back from Liège some days ago.
The school is turned into a hospital, and the good nuns are acting as
nurses for the wounded. Rosa’s German fellow-pupils are left behind.
They will presently enjoy the novel sensation of being shelled by their
own countrymen.

Rosa runs about the house like an elf and sings. For a pupil of the
Sisters at the Orphelinat de St. Joseph she is very lively. Youth has
the happy knack of living in the present. She and Louisa take it in
turns to act at “Prussien,” the fashionable game. They submit with a
good grace to be chased and well thumped on capture by Victor and René,
the aubergiste’s son.

To-night we all sit out on the _terrasse_ at the little white tables.
The whole family are here. M. and Mme Job-Lepouse, Floribert, Alfred,
Louisa, Irma, and Rosa. M. le Précepteur and his wife come over from
the post office. The postman and the picturesque poacher lounge against
the wall. In the distance the old Maids of Manhay are enjoying their
evening chase after the elusive pig, and the skeleton dog is giving
a series of infuriated yaps at his own enforced detention. The fair
unknown comes out of the red doll’s house opposite and waters the
_rosier_ with rather tremulous grace. This will be our last night of
peace....




HOW THE UHLANS CAME


“It never rains but it pours,” is as true of the Ardennes as of more
distant lands. It has been pouring all night. It is pouring now. In the
silence between the pitiless showers, we can hear the roar of the siege
guns already bombarding Liège.

More trees have been cut down during the dark hours. A great wall of
wood bars the road opposite the Gendarmerie leading to Vaux Chavannes.
Numberless recumbent tree-trunks are making great dark tracks across
the long and tortuous route towards the frontier. We have done our
share. We can but wait events.

Everything is curiously quiet this morning ... in the village. For
rustic sounds one only hears the Manhay pig grunting as he wallows with
a furious enjoyment in the churned-up mud of a distant field, and the
yapping of the miserable imprisoned dog from his box-kennel chained to
an old wall. I sit out on the _terrasse_ and begin to sew. Germaine is
brought along in her nurse’s arms and looks at me nervously. It is
ironing day, and her mother is busy collecting the washing from the
garden hedge. Victor plays the good old game of follow-my-leader up and
down the street with little René.

Madame Job comes out of the inn and leans one hand for a moment on the
back of my chair. The other steals up to her eyes.

“I can’t help thinking of Albert,” she says apologetically, “my Albert
in the forts there below.” She gazes in the direction of Liège, which
is hidden behind the distant wooded hills.

“Why fear for him?” I ask. “Is he not lucky to be in the forts, the
forts-which-are-so-strong.”

I know the comforting phrase by heart now.

“The forts-which-are-so-strong.” She repeats the words after me like a
child. A gleam of hope dawns for an instant on her kindly face, then
fades away. “Supposing he is not fed!” she says with bitter emphasis.
To the Walloon mind, hunger is almost worse than death.

Comforted by my fibs, she goes back to cook the dinner over the black
oven. The oven and Madame are indivisible. I always think of them
together.

I sew on. Suddenly steps are heard approaching from the direction
of Vaux Chavannes. They cease. Something is worming its way with a
curious brushing noise round that piled-up barrier of trees. “It” turns
the corner into the Manhay Street. A peasant is running towards me full
tilt. His face is scarlet, his mouth open with the tongue sagging over
the lips. He rolls from side to side as if drunken; reaching me he
throws up his hands.

“Les Prussiens, les Prussiens!” he shouts, and falls on his face as
though possessed.

We bring him water, we fan him. He revives.

“Three hundred Prussians are at Vaux Chavannes,” gasps the messenger.

The peasants disperse as though scattered by a shell. The village
idiot takes cover in the pig-sty. Germaine is dropped by an agitated
and diminutive nurse and immediately begins to scream. She is forcibly
dragged to shelter. A scuttling and jabbering ensues. One hears the
swish of skirts, the quick tramp-tramp of heavy boots, the sound of
creaking stairs. I drag the fainting man into the hotel, quickly close
and bolt the door, prop him against the wall, and go to the open
dining-room window.

Manhay might stand as a model for “The Deserted Village.” The inn is
silent as the grave, the family of Job-Lepouse is doubtless in the
fields. With me curiosity overrides fear. Even if it entails certain
death I must see the Uhlans come. There is a sharp clitter-clatter of
horses’ hoofs along the Vaux Chavannes road. It stops abruptly at the
barricade. I hear a volley of very German curses, the crash-crash of
weapons and then a mutilated bicycle comes hurtling through the air. I
hear the cry of a man in pain. Some poor devil has been caught....

The Uhlans are in our street. They mass by the Gendarmerie, glare
fiercely round. They have learned the feeling of the countryside in
those barred tree-trunks which have crossed their path. They suspect
a plot and are keen to fight. Charging down the road they come, lance
out, heads erect, the sun glinting a thousand sparks from the rim of
their metal helmets where it is left unprotected by the light cloth
shield. They are not quite so smart as when parading last before their
adoring women-kind. Their horses’ flanks are streaming, their uniforms
dusty. “What splendid men they are!” is my first impression. “This is
just like comic opera,” is my second. But when, at closer range, my
eyes meet those long, sharp lances and that Teuton glare, I confess my
third is funk!

I shall never forget that first moment of invasion. The forest of
lances, the grey steel of pointed revolvers, sobbing women and
frightened children. The desertion of the little village street and
the scuttling of agonised peasants into their houses. The banging and
locking of doors, the sudden silence as they scatter in the stable ...
cellar ... fields. I can see it now.... I shall see it always.

One peasant is not fortunate enough to escape. A Uhlan with an
over-developed (Teuton) sense of humour, pricks him in the fleshy part
of the shoulder with the point of the lance. Having secured a good
hold, the German gallops up and down the village, driving the unlucky
man before him at a furious speed.

The remainder of the troop form up and charge towards us down the road.
They interrupt their dash at the post office. The officer points a
revolver at M. le Précepteur’s head in the ingratiating German way and
asks some question. I swear that M. le Précepteur’s hair is standing on
end in the manner hair so frequently assumes in novels, so very seldom
in real life.

Something grey and cold intercepts itself between me and the sun.
Something cold and grey touches my forehead and a gleaming face comes
on a level with my own. The first contact of that revolver makes my
knees tremble and gives me a cold sensation down my spine. But I do
not budge. My captor neither addresses me nor I him. We simply stare
stupidly at one another. A wasp, attracted by the bright metal helmet
rim, plays about his face. The hand that holds the revolver trembles. I
am almost but not quite amused. Suddenly the weapon is withdrawn. The
troop gather up their reins, canter on through the village and halt in
consultation at the head of the street.

A curious intuition tells me that the Uhlans are afraid ... of our
fear, that those tightly barricaded doors and closed windows suggest
plots—perhaps armed resistance. It occurs to me that it would be wiser
to show ourselves, to feign indifference. In times like these men are
shot for showing the white feather.

I rush out and call the peasants by name. One or two stare stupidly
from the windows, the rest do not budge. Many are in the fields, some
probably in the cellars. I sit down on the _terrasse_ and draw the
little white chair close up to the painted white table. The moustached
postman in the dirty white ducks comes to my side, so does the
poacher, unshaven but ever picturesque in his brown corduroys.

The order has been given to charge. They are coming back, the gallant
Uhlans! Will they shoot us down? We shall know soon enough. I lift my
glass of bock with a rather shaky hand while the postman puffs at his
pipe and the poacher half smiles. He is a feckless, fearless rascal.
Here they come, lances and all. The foremost misses my head by half an
inch. I wince. The soldiers look unutterably fierce as they clatter
past. The last few cover us with their revolvers until they turn
the corner of the road. Clitter-clatter—fainter—then silence. The
postman, ever solemn, turns to me and reaches over an enormous hand.

“Vous êtes—bon soldat, Mademoiselle,” he says, as he rises abruptly
and saunters away down the street, puffing at his everlasting pipe.




ANYTHING FOR BREAD


The Uhlans are no longer a novelty, they are a frightful bore. One
cannot take two steps outside the village without a soldier in that
grey-greeny-blue uniform popping up from behind a tree or appearing as
if marionetted down from the cloudless sky. Whenever I see one I have
to repress a devouring wish to run.

The war has already taught me one lesson. That there is nothing more
dangerous than a frightened soldier. The funk of a scared German oozes
into his rifle—not his boots....

All the roads from the frontier, in fact the entire Ardennes are being
patrolled by these creatures. To-day we have had armoured cars passing
to and fro at break-neck speed, manned by soldiers and positively
bristling with rifles.

Boom—boom—boom! It has been going on all day and all night, for the
last three days and nights—that horrible cannon at Liège. Madame Job
can hardly drag herself down this morning. She feels that each sound
may mean the annihilation of her dear Albert. Mlle Irma is crying
gently too. My soup is decidedly watery and my omelette impossible.
C’est la guerre!

A straggling procession of women visits the inn. Most of them have
baskets. They have walked many miles in the burning heat. They need
bread. Alas! Albert in the fort there below has other things than
baking to think about. Besides, there is very little flour. Only just
enough for M. le Directeur, the château on the hill and ourselves.

Madame Job stands out in the street and wrinkles her forehead at the
sight of the familiar words, “Boulangerie Lepouse.” She does not mind
the villagers, but suppose the dreaded Uhlans interpret the sign.
What will happen to those six black loaves so snugly concealed in the
postmaster’s cupboard? M. Alfred mounts a ladder and sploshes out the
offending letters till nothing but a few black smudges and a hooded
cart in the backyard tell of their once thriving trade in bread.




FICTION _v._ FACT


We have had no Prussians in the village for quite four-and-twenty
hours, so the peasants are becoming almost their normal selves. We walk
freely about the street and dare to laugh. Laughter is a rare sound in
Manhay these days. We even affect to despise the Germans for not coming
on in greater numbers.

“Nous avons vu les échantillons, mais où sont les marchandises?” (We
have seen the samples, but where are the goods?) asks one village wit.

M. Floribert puts his tongue in his cheek and says the Walloon
equivalent of “let ’em all come.”

René and Victor are showing their contempt for the foe by lassoing
imaginary Prussians up and down the street, René as usual acting the
unfortunate Teuton who is lassoed, hanged, decapitated, in whirlwind
fashion, turn by turn.

A group of women sit out under the shady trees in the orchard and talk
together as they mend their socks. Some of the older men stroll over
to us and spin yarns. An Ardennois legend is spoken of. Anyone could
weave a legend round a spider’s web in the Ardennes. But legend-making
is really rather out of fashion. Instead we have become military
experts in minutiæ. We splay our fingers convincingly upon our tattered
maps and say here ... and here ... are the English, there ... there ...
and there are the French. They will advance so, and the Germans will
retreat so ... until our audience fades away from sheer boredom and we
are left to strategise alone.

The jade Rumour mocks our faith at every turn. We begin by swallowing
each new idea with delicious open-mouthed credulity. The Germans have
already conquered Antwerp ... England ... the world. Our cruisers
have been sunk _en masse_. All the French generals have been shot.
Someone has launched a projectile from an aeroplane and destroyed the
entire Teuton army at one fell stroke. We sit out boldly on the hotel
_terrasse_ after this last glorious item of news and sip our coffee
with brave show. Only the entry of some noisy Uhlans suffices to
scatter us and rumour at the same time....

“Do be quiet!” says M. Job testily later in the day. He is worried by
his children’s nervous chatter as they wander restlessly about the
dimly lighted rooms. He has been working in the nursery garden all
through the hot hours and is a little annoyed not to find his supper
ready.

Mdlle. Rosa slips a soft white hand into her mother’s wrinkled one and
rubs her slender nose affectionately against the elder woman’s cheek.
Even in war-time she does not forget the teaching of the Good Sisters
of the Orphelinat de St. Joseph. She repeats in a dreamy childish
voice: “Te souviens, Maman. Qui que le bon Dieu garde, eh bien il le
garde ... bien” (Remember, Mamma, he whom God watches over He guards
well). So we go to bed consoled.




THE “TERRIBLE” FRENCH!


This is a gala day. Company to lunch! The Tax-collector has walked here
from a small town thirty miles away, en route for Aywaille, another
twenty, where he intends to fetch his son from school.

“Quelle désastre que cette guerre,” is his opening remark as we
fraternise over the vegetable soup.

I agree.

He draws something from his pocket and throws it across to me. It is a
bullet. He shows me a large blister on his finger. “I was over-zealous
for that keepsake this morning,” he says, laughing, “and tried to
pick it up when it was red hot. There was a fight raging round my
little house before I left. Picture to yourself a patrol of Uhlans
breakfasting in the hotel-barn opposite. A company of French ride up
and demand if the enemy is within. The innkeeper answers, trembling,
‘No.’ ‘The truth!’ thunder the Frenchmen, covering him with revolvers.
He confesses. _Mon Dieu!_ What a scene! The French force the innkeeper
and his son to set fire to their own barn, and when at length the
Germans come out, one by one, stifled with smoke, they calmly pot
them off, as if they were so many rabbits. Stay! One Frenchman rushes
in before the fire has done its work. He dies a moment later, shot
through the heart. I found on him two letters, to his mother and his
sweetheart. Such letters!”

“The French are very brave,” I say.

“I tell you they fight—not like men but—_comme les démons_. They
don’t ride up as the Uhlans do. They just‘appear’ like lightning or
earthquake or any other phenomenon and then—phew—_le déluge_.”

“Every German who comes in here says that the Belgians have cut off the
ears and gouged out the eyes of their wounded before Liège,” I say. “We
on our side are horrified at the tale of German atrocities. Each time
a German enters this village we feel that the tragedy of Visé may be
enacted over again.”

The Tax-collector shrugs his shoulders as he fingers a cigarette.

“You must remember it is against the rules of warfare for
non-combatants to fire,” he murmurs.

“Have they?”

He flicks an infinitesimal spot of dust from the table-cloth, and does
not answer me.

Yet if one’s country be invaded who shall say that one may not avail
oneself of any means to oust the hated foe?

The nostalgia of war seizes me. I know a country where such things
could not be. Shall I ever see England, dear England again?
Involuntarily I breathe the words aloud. The Tax-collector leans across
to me and speaks firmly but very gently as one would address a tired
child, “You will never see England again, never, Mademoiselle. Make up
your mind to that.”

I scrape my chair back along the wooden boards and rise in a flurry
because “it is so hot, so hot”—and escape to my room to dream of what
might have been but never can be now——




SPIES AHOY


Chasse-aux-espions! A governmental order has come through that we are
to arrest any suspicious-looking person who passes through the village.
We suspect ourselves. We suspect everybody. We are only deterred from
action by one thought. The horror of shooting in cold blood a poor,
blindfolded, unarmed human thing.

The village is thrilled with excitement this morning. A tourist in
tweed suit and knicker-bockers has arrived. He hangs up his soft felt
hat in the hall and follows up his breakfast order with comments on the
war. He has come from Vielsalm. He has spoken with the Germans. The
peasants cluster round him.

“Nice kind fellows the Germans seem,” he says casually, as he walks
into the dining-room and takes his seat.

That is sufficient. The men nudge each other and direct mysterious
glances towards the door. I am invited to arrest him! I murmur that
M. le Directeur and the Bourgmestre have the prior right but that I
shall be delighted to assist. On one condition. If found guilty the
miscreant must be despatched round the corner and not before my eyes.
The Bourgmestre when sent for will not come; I fetch M. le Directeur.
“All unconscious of his fate” the spy is enjoying an excellent meal
of bacon and eggs. He starts up as we enter and turns rather white.
When challenged he opens his pocket-book and shows us his papers with
admirable composure.

Dreadful error! On his card I read, “Monsieur Jottrand, Premier
Avocat-Général à la Court d’Appel, Bruxelles.”

There is a burst of merriment from the peasants. They surge round him.
M. le Directeur shakes him warmly by the hand. I rush to hide myself
behind the big black stove in the kitchen.

The “spy” follows me in a moment later. “I congratulate myself,
Mademoiselle,” he says. “I have never had the pleasure of being
arrested by an Englishwoman before!”

M. Jottrand is tramping his way back to Brussels. He has lost all his
luggage but is quite cheerful. So far he has escaped with his life.
That is something these days.

Soon after he leaves us, German troops arrive in the village and knock
at the doors of every house in Grand-Mesnil. “We give you one hour,”
they say, “to remove those trees on the Bomale and Vielsalm roads.”

A hurried conference takes place between the peasants. I interrogate
one of them in the street next day. “How about those trees?” I ask.

“Oh, we removed them all right,” he answers. “Not quite as the
Prussians intended, however. Un pas de gattes (goat’s path). On a
modest estimate it will take the German army about three years to pass
along in single file!”




THREATENED WITH DEATH


“Sauvez-vous, sauvez-vous!” This warning yelled in strident, horrified
tones is not the most cheerful awakener on a hot summer’s morning.

I hastily throw on some clothes. With my hair scruntled up in a little
bun I rush to the window.

A German officer is standing before the house opposite, pointing a
revolver at M. Job’s head. He issues orders in a harsh voice.

As he turns away to address his men, M. Job leaps across the road like
a hare, his little sun-dried face pale as death.

“Save yourselves, my children. They are going to shoot us all down and
set fire to the village. We have only a moment to escape. Sauvez-vous,
sauvez-vous.”

He dashes headlong into the house. A second later the entire Job
family are scuttling in and out of the inn back door, in a concerted
arrangement to convey some of their things to a safe hiding-place in
the fields before it is too late.

I rush back to my room, secrete my jewellery and a treasured letter or
two under my dress, make a small packet of soap, toothbrush and other
necessaries. Then I go to the front window and peer through.

The officer is still in the same position, revolver in hand, addressing
his men in rather angry tones. He has begun no violence as yet.

They are outside the door of a poor old woman who is quite alone. She
understands no German and must be dying of fear.

I lean from the dining-room window and say with what firmness I can
muster:

“What are you doing?”

“Go indoors,” says a soldier, motioning me imperiously back.

“The peasants have fired on us, so we shall shoot most of you and burn
the village,” says the officer, covering me with his revolver.

“Our orders,” adds a soldier nonchalantly.

“But we have no——” (I cannot for the life of me remember “weapon”
in German, so I act the word in dumb show, one clenched hand to my
shoulder, the other in a straight line but further away. I shut one eye
and look along my fists to be more convincing.) “There is not one in
the village,” I assure him.

I wish my voice wouldn’t tremble so. It sounds cowardly.

He turns away and calls to the inhabitants of the little cottage before
which he stands to come out. The old lady is alone there and I would
bet my life she is hiding under the bed at this moment. So I run into
the street and the sunshine and, quite beside myself, almost implore
the officer not to do this thing.

Disregarding my entreaties he stands with uplifted revolver before the
cottage door.

“Come out,” he says again.

No answer.

Before I can move, he lifts his weapon once more. With the gestures of
a chef d’orchestre in the opening bars of his favourite orchestra, he
strikes the glass panes of the door this way and that with the cold
steel. The glass shatters in a thousand fragments on the square stone
step. There is something so cruel and calculating in the expression of
his hard face. With a smile of satisfaction the officer fires once,
twice, thrice into the recesses of the room. One would think a mouse
could not escape.

He throws something which must be a hand grenade into the midst of the
mysterious still gloom. In an instant smoke and flames seem to rise
from the very ground before my horrified eyes. Then he calmly shoots
once—twice again into the seething darkness to make sure that he has
missed nothing. He turns away to look for the next victim.

I can’t help the tears running down my cheeks, but I say again:

“Indeed, indeed we have never fired. If you search the village through
you will find we have nothing to fire with.”

“I heard them,” he says sternly.

In the distance a woman is scuttling along, trying to reach a
neighbour’s house in safety. She is so terror-stricken, her progress
is like the gait of a sick fowl. A living example is to hand. I point
towards her. “Look at that,” I say. “The poor women are so frightened
they cry all day long. Besides the women there are only old men and
boys. Their one wish is to get the harvest in in peace. Is that a
crime?”

A conference takes place between the soldiers I gather that our fate is
in the balance. We must be born under a lucky star. We are saved again.
The officer remounts his horse. He and his troop ride off briskly in
the direction of Grand-Mesnil.

They are scarcely round the corner before the entire population of
the village has rushed out carrying every bucket and jug they can lay
their hands on. The old lady, not dead as I expected, but considerably
stupefied by smoke, is saved from the burning house and set under the
hedge to recover. The rest of us form a line and pass bucket after
bucket of water from the pump, in the best workmanlike, fireman style.

The flames have got a good hold and the smoke is stifling, but we all
work with a will and soon subdue them.

A young Belgian, just arrived on a motor-bicycle, says “salle cochons”
under his breath, but does not help in the work of rescue. Later he
confides to me that he is a Belgian spy carrying dispatches. Two days
ago he was at Louvain talking with an officer of the “men in skirts.”
My heart leaps to think they are so near.

“This morning I have come from Liège,” he says. “The German dead were
piled up each side of my path, ghastly lolling corpses, one on the top
of each other.” He puts his hand up higher than his head. “It was the
most awful sight I have ever seen, and then the odour....” And the poor
spy is literally sick in the village street.

I go back to the burnt cottage. Already willing hands have pulled
out odds and ends of still smouldering furniture. The old lady’s
cat, disturbed in early morning slumber, has once more resumed its
accustomed position on the blackened doorstep. Its expression is
cynical and its back arched in a definite anti-Prussian hump. I have
no reason whatever to doubt the accuracy of its language when the next
Uhlan comes along. The young Job-Lepouses who have been foremost in
helping to extinguish the fire, return with me to breakfast. I have
leisure to study their appearance.

Yesterday they were of reasonable size. To-day they look as though they
had undergone a sudden fattening process which has taken effect in the
most unlikely places. For instance, Mdlle Rosa’s right shoulder appears
to be afflicted with a monstrous and most unsightly hump. Madame Job’s
instep almost equals in size the girth of her waist. M. Floribert has
a forearm which would not disgrace a Hackenschmidt. The secret is soon
explained.

“Ha-ha, j’ai mes petites économies,” cries Mlle Louisa, dragging a fat
leather bag from under her skirt.

M. Floribert smiles anxiously. He has numerous treasures up his
sleeves, including his Sunday ties.

Madame Job lets down her stocking with the utmost sang-froid and
displays a leg bound with Belgian paper money and bandaged with some
nice old lace.

The house was stripped bare in those few minutes of pregnant danger.
Linen, books and even bread were transferred to the most remote and
sheltered corner of the vegetable garden. Here they were deposited in
the camion or hooded cart in which M. Albert in the happy days, now
gone, used to distribute the crisp, round loaves to the countryside.
Here, too, hid Mdme la Précepteur, the children and Mdme Job until the
danger had passed by....




TO LEAVE OR NOT TO LEAVE


People are leaving the village in ones and twos. It is pathetic to
watch them come out of their houses, gently turn the key in the lock
and then, with slow, sad step, walk quietly away along the high road,
turning their backs for ever on their little world. They carry their
most cherished possessions in a square cotton sack-bag of enormous
check design slung from their shoulders. In their hands are little
parcels or perhaps a straw basket packed with a medley of quaint
treasures. Small, sturdy, brown-faced children run at their heels.

The peasants visualise mentally the awful atrocities at Visé and
tremble at the knowledge that many men have been shot in the
surrounding countryside. They say to themselves, “What happens there
will happen here to-morrow.” They are afraid. They leave. If they stay
it will be in a famine-stricken, Uhlan-haunted country. As they go ...
well, I hope they have somewhere to go to!

As refugees they will earn the sympathy of all. But charity,
compensation, re-instatement, will never make them amends for the loss
of lands and relatives and the dreadful agony of mind they have endured.

The lady of the _rosier_ has fled. The watering-can is thrown
carelessly in a corner and the _rosier_ is already beginning to fade.
The curtains are drawn and the doors locked at the red house opposite.
The old maids of Manhay are suspected of planning a similar flight
or their pig is very out-of-hand. He has been caught executing weird
manœuvres in the street village, including the charging of ten tired
Uhlans who coldly rebuffed him at the point of the lance.

Stragglers have come in from the frontier on their way from here to
nowhere. They have the weary, listless air of people who have lost all
interest in their lives. They carry their possessions in a small brown
parcel and have the inevitable children dragging behind them. One can
only offer them food and drink (we have not too much to spare) and
speed them on their way.

Refugeeing seems in the air. I am amazed to find the house of
Job-Lepouse, at least the feminine portion, is now thinking of
retreat. I come upon Madame Job, the two little girls and Messieurs
Alfred and Floribert, all busy packing things in the backyard. A huge
_malle-poste_ with two horses is drawn up near the stables, a large,
wide-mouthed washing-basket on the roof, lashed to the sides by stout
cords, is being filled with an extraordinary medley of food, clothes,
linen, books and articles of all kinds.

Madame Job, ever tearful, informs me that they are leaving for a
retired little farm in the country, near Esneux, where they will be
away from this dreadful high road and comparatively safe.

“You will come too, Mademoiselle?” she implores.

I demur. Any change will only mean out of the frying-pan into the fire.
We may be slaughtered en route or arrested as spies. While I hesitate
Madame la Précepteur rushes over attired as for a journey, carrying the
little Germaine in cloak and bonnet. She is followed by Victor, dressed
in sailor clothes. Their belongings are tied up in a large bag.

“The inn will have to be kept open or it will be sacked,” I say. “I
think I will stay here, Madame.”

Mdlle Irma links her arm in mine and voices her determination to stay
too.

The others are just about to take their seats in the great rambling
vehicle when M. le Précepteur comes running across the road, white
faced and agitated.

“They have caught a postman,” he says, “and torn up and scattered his
letters over the forest.”

No need to ask who “they” are!

“Another postman has escaped by throwing his bicycle down by the
roadside and plunging into the heart of the woods.”

No one seems to know whether the first man was killed, though rumour
surmises he is injured. The point is, these encounters take place on
the very road the _malle-poste_ has to traverse.

Afraid to stay, afraid to go, poor Madame Job is in a sad plight.
Finally the huge washing-basket with its moorings of cord is safely
transferred to the cemented kitchen floor. The Précepteur, his wife and
children, the Job-Lepouses and numerous villagers who had turned in to
bid them good-bye, have a kind of second breakfast of black bread and
coffee round that inevitable big black stove which I always, in my own
mind, call “the peasants’” friend.




WHAT THE UHLANS THINK


A furious fight is going on in the village street. Fists and tongues
striving to outdo each other. _Les Prussiens_, of course. I think if
the earth opened and swallowed us up we should at once attribute it
to German atrocities! But this time the aubergiste is cuffing the
picturesque poacher for something that gentleman has done.

“Brave garçon,” sneers a passer-by.

“Malain,” retorts the poacher fiercely.

The peasants fling themselves on the malcontents and proclaim a truce.
They argue rightly that only fools quarrel in war-time.

Truth will out. There is method in the aubergiste’s madness. The
poacher has confessed that he was responsible for our recent danger.
Yesterday, it seems, he shot at a hare in the woods three miles away.

A slender thread of evidence on which to convict us of treason, but
apparently any excuse is sufficient for these arrogant Germans.

I add my voice to the storm of eloquent advice, “Tickle trout, trap
hares, lay night-lines, make use of any and every device known to the
poaching mind, but _do not shoot_.”

The culprit slinks meekly round the corner, still puffing at his
curved-stem pipe. But I think he has learnt his lesson and will not be
seen on the hills for some time to come....

The Uhlans are certainly a queer lot. We have ample opportunities of
studying them, as they are for ever pushing forward, on their mission
of patrolling the countryside. No sooner have we become accustomed
to one troop and may congratulate ourselves our lives are safe, than
another arrives to take its place. Sometimes they return in the
evening, half without horses, or with the full complement of horses but
the riders gone.

Of one patrol which went out scouting yesterday to Laroche, only the
officer came back. Someone informed the French cavalry at a village
near, and they cunningly laid an ambuscade in the wood at Samrée and
cut them off. The greeny-grey uniform saved the German officer. He
threw himself flat in the pine dust and managed to escape and make his
way back to Manhay, footsore and weary. I saw him sitting on the bank
by the roadside near the village last night, writing a letter to his
mother. He was little more than a lad. “I shall never see her again,”
he said, crying. No more he will. He was killed to-day....

The Germans, though brave, seem inferior to the French in their
scouting methods. Time and again small French patrols would cut them
off, exercising superior finesse. One day in a skirmish outside
the village, however, the Uhlans beat the French. An officer was
triumphantly borne away prisoner to Werboumont. How thrilled we were at
the sight of the culotte rouge. If there had only been more of them and
free!

No one speaks of the men in skirts any more. The continuous stream of
trains that was carrying the Highlanders into Liège have gone the way
of all myths. The enthusiasm for the English is slightly on the wane.
“They ought to come soon,” the peasants mutter discontentedly. “Without
doubt they have their plan of campaign,” says little M. Job, who is
always trusting.

Early morning and late at night is the time when we have the Uhlans
mostly with us. It is nothing for them to call at 6 a.m. for breakfast,
and they arrive in boisterous spirits (when they have suffered no
losses) and call for beer at night.

They seem to have an extraordinary love for music—or noise. They do
not know in the least what they are going to war about, but most of
them ask for a piano. The wheezy hotel gramophone affords them sheer
delight. They must make music to-day if they die to-morrow. “À Paris,
à Paris!” is the cry of the more enthusiastic, but “I’d rather be at
home” is the qualifying statement of not a few.

One soldier confesses he feels the cord tightening round his neck each
day. “Every advance means more danger,” says another gloomily. A third
shows me his cartridge case. “Four for the enemy, one for the Kaiser,”
is his pithy comment. There is an infectious air of gaiety about the
frontier-sheltered lads, which is lacking in those who have once been
shot over. As for the men with sad faces, it is enough to see their
hands. They usually wear a wedding ring on the third finger.

The soldiers have remarkable ideas on the subject of the present
campaign. Many honestly believe, and have probably been told so by
their officers, that Belgium wantonly declared war on Germany. They
say gleefully, “all the world is against us,” and tick off the various
countries on their fingers. They simulate nothing but contempt for
all concerned—except the French. Of them they have a wholesome awe.
Perhaps they are right. A man’s punch must have an extra kick in it
when backed by three decades of hate....

“Russia! The Cossacks look fierce, but they run away,” say the Uhlans.
“England. A mere handful of men. What are a hundred and fifty thousand
to us.” They jerk their thumbs over the shoulders as though casting
England to the deuce. “The French, yes. Terrible men, the French. But
we shall win.”

I hope they will meet the English soon and get their ideas put right,
as they surely will....




THE SIGN OF THE RED CROSS


We no longer inhabit a cheerful Belgian village. In an unaccustomed
country we must train ourselves to meet new laws. On Sunday we go to
church. After service from the good Curé, M. le Directeur reads out to
us a list of rules.

We must not collect in crowds, nor speak more than three in the village
street.

We must not hide in the houses, but go about our ordinary avocations
when the soldiers pass, or they will suspect a plot.

We must never run away—unless we want a bullet in the back—but throw
up our hands when called upon to do so.

We must never do this and we must remember that, or we may expect to be
bowled over as lightly as the wood blocks in that skittle alley which
is the “distraction” of the Ardennois Sunday.

A German officer has frankly told us that the very smallest reprisal
for any inimical act will be house-burning. Should a civilian dare
to fire on the German troops, well, that village may expect to be
decimated of its remaining men. Besides this the Teutons do not trust
our word. Twice to-day an officer has forced me to drink first from his
glass of beer. The young Job-Lepouses have to do the same. A suspicious
Uhlan intends to run no unnecessary risk.

No peace for the wicked! There is the air peril to contend with. A
sound often heard here, like a hundred threshing machines in full
swing, made me think at first that the peasants were working in the
fields. The mystery is solved when glancing far, far up where sky and
cloud seem to meet, an aeroplane is seen buzzing slowly overhead.
Sometimes we see it near enough to recognise its white body with the
black tail-planes and tips to wings. German, of course, always German.
We never have any other here. I watch the machine as it begins to
descend at an acute angle. A thousand feet down, it hovers for a while.
Finally, it planes earthwards like some great, ominous magpie until
hidden from sight in the hollow of a distant field.

  “One for sorrow.”

Another machine comes sailing majestically towards us from the nebulous
distance.

  “Two for mirth.”

It will take us all our time to derive any amusement from these
bomb-dropping fiends....

A brain-wave has passed over the village. The word “red-cross” is
mentioned. M. le Directeur suggests with admirable sense that the inn
should be turned into a hospital for the wounded soldiers. Wonderful
the enthusiasm this idea has evoked. Extraordinary the unanimity with
which it is received by the peasants.

M. le Précepteur wishes to hang a flag out of his window too. His step
becomes more elastic, his expression brighter at the mere idea. This
seems to him an opportune way of staving off the awful, possible hour
of arrest. He is actuated, too, by that beautiful sense of compassion
which makes the Belgian nature so attractive.

The burnt-out old lady is quite vociferous with joy at the prospect
of nursing the enemy. It never occurs to her that she will thereby
heap coals of fire on the miscreants who so basely tried to destroy
her little home. At this moment she is sitting out in the potato-patch
industriously picking over the flock in her mattress. The adjacent
hedge is hung with odds and ends of half-burnt coverlets and clothes.
I know she is scheming in her generous Walloon brain how much of
her slender household stock can be spared for the use of the wounded
soldiers.

These flags—the great red cross on the white ground—are produced in
the shortest space of time. We breathe more freely when they float out
majestically from the hotel windows. We are as afire with first-aid
enthusiasm as any ignorant sixteen-year-old Miss who has volunteered
for the front. Every woman in the village has offered her help. She
will insist on giving it too. I pity the first victim who arrives. He
is likely to be pulled into a thousand pieces!

Scarcely any Uhlans have passed through to-day. Those who did were well
behaved. This fact and the Red Cross flag have combined to make us
quite jovial. The skittle alley is in use again. A group of villagers
is gathered on the _terrasse_ telling war-tales which would make our
English fishermen green with envy.

One tale no one tells, however, out of respect to Madame Job. That
is the tale of the Liège forts. We are all under a solemn pledge to
believe that they are still intact. We know better. Anyone would know
better after the awful cannonade of the last few days. But in our
common humanity we cannot bear that Madame Job should know before she
must, that her Albert “in-the-forts-there-below” is dead, safe though
she thought him in those forts, “the-forts-which-are-so-strong.”...




ON THE ROAD


The village is parched for news. Only the black, yellow and red flag
floating majestically above the Gendarmerie wall and the dull boom-boom
of the cannon which, night and day, still comes from the direction
of Liège, remind us that we are in Belgium, an integral part of that
gallant little land. We have been without letters and papers for a
week. We know nothing. Scarcely a living soul dares to find his way
along the Uhlan-infested roads.

The engines of the little vicinal train are still packed away in their
sheds in tidy rows. The ticket office is deserted. The workmen sit
quietly at home, watching the starvation ghoul tread nearer day by day.
The two-horsed _malle-postes_ which feed the surrounding villages with
letters from our central Manhay office have ceased running.

We are athirst for truth. Most would give all they possess (it is not
worth much!) for just one word of encouragement about the campaign.
It is terrible to hear the cannon dealing out slaughter to your loved
ones, to know that your houses, your food, your very lives are in
hourly jeopardy, to be “in” the war and yet more ignorant of its events
and trend than the people of India in all likelihood.

Yet the peasants never curse the enemy. That is the most wonderful
thing. This very day I have seen a very poor villager give all the
drink he had in his little house to some Uhlans whom he thought looked
tired. He refused payment with indignation. It was a gift.

We are all suffering from Prussian eye. We see Uhlans everywhere.
Behind the hedges, under the shade of the trees, popping out of cottage
doors, springing Jack-in-the-box-like from beneath a bridge. We
dream Uhlan, we talk Uhlan, we taste Uhlan. I think a fine should be
inflicted on any villager who mentions the hated word more than once in
twenty-four hours.

A peasant deserter has been discovered in an adjacent village. He
ought to have joined the 13th Classe by rights when it was called up.
Poor fellow! He has a wife and three young delicate children and is,
I fancy, none too strong himself. What torture to remain there in
disgrace among the old men and young boys. And the penalty for him at
the end is death....

Heroic M. le Directeur and his wife. I often think of them in their
little country house near by. The vicinal railway which has opened
up this exquisite corner of the world is due to his initiative. The
peasants look to him as to a father.

His wife goes quietly about her business during this dreadful time as
though there were no such thing as war. “Il faut feindre” (one must
make-believe), she says to me. She does it well. No one would guess
that her mother is in the burning village of Visé and the rest of their
relations shut up in Liège. How hard it is for them to possess their
souls in patience when loved ones are suffering so few—so very few
miles away.

Like Madame Job they are thirsting for news. But unlike her they keep
the longing to themselves. Madame Job has, I believe, a sneaking hope
that Albert may turn up one day outside the little white-washed inn. I
suspect she would rather have her beloved Albert a live coward than a
dead hero.

A wire has come from Erezée, ten miles away, to say that packets of
letters have arrived. A system of hand-messengers has been successful
in bringing them through from Namur without mishap. Who will volunteer
to rush them to Manhay through our Uhlan-infested country?

The postmen refuse because of the trouncing their comrades received
yesterday. M. A—— and I agree to have a try. He harnesses the hotel
horse and we start off in the light spring dog-cart. Behind we have two
refugees from Gouvy. They own no luggage beyond a bird-cage, so we are
not over-loaded.

Gouvy is a frontier town which the Germans are fortifying in case of
their enforced retreat. They have installed several regiments there and
made the inhabitants’ lives unbearable. The station-master, postmaster
and other civilians have been sent off as prisoners of war to Berlin
after the pleasant Teuton fashion. These poor refugees are going to
their parents at Barvaux, near Namur. May they find peace there as they
expect. Personally I doubt it!

The drive to Erezée is uneventful. We suspect a Uhlan behind every
tree-trunk but none appears. No living soul is on the road. As we enter
the village street the peasants run out of the houses to welcome us. It
is almost a royal progress. We realise how isolated these villages now
are from one another.

A tiny Belgian flag is flying from the church at the top of the hill.
Evidently the best the village could provide; it must have taken the
choir, the Curé and all his merry, merry men to hoist it to its present
height. As a decorative item that flag is beneath contempt. Its slender
flag-pole is of such curved dimensions as to make it stick out from
the belfry quite lop-sidedly. But as a moral factor it is beyond all
praise....

We alight by the picturesque old pump. A crowd, including the gypsies
from a travelling caravan, gathers round us anxious to hear the news.

In return they tell us theirs. One story interests me. At Hotton, near
Melreux, a few miles away, the Colonel of an invading troop called
on the doctor’s wife and politely asked her for the address of the
Bourgmestre.

The doctor’s wife, not to be outdone in civility, sent her little girl
along to show him.

In a short while the Colonel returned with the Bourgmestre in tow as
prisoner.

“Where is your husband?” he demanded of the doctor’s wife.

“Out visiting patients,” she replied.

“Out when I ask for him!” shrieked the infuriated officer, “I will
have him shot for disobeying orders!”

This gross piece of injustice was happily not perpetrated. The Colonel
graciously forgave the doctor, for, when the soldiers went to fetch
him, he was found tending the German wounded with tender care....




RUSHING THE MAILS THROUGH


Conventionality dies an easy death in time of war. Erezée is new to me,
but in less than half an hour I have talked to more people than I do
in England in a twelve-month. They all have the same tale to tell of
sleepless nights, of ever-present horror at what may be at any moment.
But so far they have been spared atrocities.

There is a sudden scuttle of every able-bodied person in the direction
of the post office. The long-awaited post is in. An enterprising
postman, “_en vélo_,” who has rushed them through is congratulated on
every side. A crowd surges round the open window, stretching out eager
hands to the clerks who are swiftly sorting the numerous piles of
letters. The counter has long been appropriated by wrinkled peasants
whose one anxiety is for news of the husbands and brothers who are so
gallantly fighting for their rights at Liège.

Someone tears off a wrapper. The thin broad sheets of a Brussels
evening paper flutter in the breeze. Old men and women, young boys
and girls gather round the owner with uplifted, expectant faces.
Some do not know how to read, others have their eyes too full of
tears. Besides, good news is so much more convincing when read aloud.
The audience listens entranced. The gallantry of these Belgian
troops—peasants like themselves—their valour is almost past belief!
The work-worn, tired, rough-hewn faces turn to meet each other
transfigured into beauty by their mutual look of pride....

We cannot, dare not wait to hear it all. The Uhlans may be here at any
moment. I climb into the high dog-cart. The _dépêches_ are put under
the seat, even under my feet. I sit on a heap of them.... So does my
companion. They are for Vaux Chavannes, Grand-Mesnil, all the little
villages around, extending to Aywaille, twenty kilomètres away.

Carefully masking every sign of paper with a thick blue rug, we start
off on the homeward journey. Not without tremors, for if we fall into
the Uhlan hands anything may happen.

When we pass the last of the little cottages, and the last watching
peasant has waved us farewell, I begin to fear.

Six solid miles of thick woods stretch before us rolling down to
the roadside on either hand. Here it was they caught the _facteur_
yesterday. I suddenly loathe the sight of those green, feathery
branches; they may cover up so much.

I glance at M. A——. His round happy face is rounder and happier than
usual. He is even lighting a cigarette, though he finds it difficult,
as he is trying to hold the reins and watch the horse and the woods at
the same time.

Never have I seen an Ardennois without a pipe or cigarette in his
mouth. I think a true son of the soil would start to light one with the
death-rattle in his throat!

I imagine a dreaded Prussian behind every tree-trunk and under every
bush for some miles. Then I clear my throat and ask mildly as we jog
along (it would look suspicious to increase our pace):

“Supposing, just supposing we _did_ happen to run across any Germans,
and they _did_ threaten to shoot us unless we delivered up the letters,
which would you do?”

“Deliver up the letters, of course,” he says matter-of-factly, puffing
at his cigarette.

I breathe a sigh of relief. After all, a whole skin is a more precious
possession than much fine writing!

Providence watches over us again. As we near the beautiful avenue of
fir trees which connects the Bomale road with Manhay, a peasant scout
rushes out to warn us that Uhlans are ahead. We have just time to
escape into a little lane.

More peasants come running up presently to tell us the road is clear.
There is always the danger of being covered by field-glasses from
some wooded hill, with its sequence of surprise attack, so we jog
slowly along and drive into the yard instead of drawing up at the post
office. Three minutes later a company of Hussars passes through without
drawing rein. They are in high good humour, chattering, laughing, quite
unsuspicious that the peasants they despise have been quick-witted
enough to get the mails through under their very eyes!

Willing men are posted at intervals round the street and even in the
fields to prevent an attack. M. le Précepteur saunters over from the
post office and sets to work sorting letters in the back kitchen. It is
safer there....

The dining-room blinds are drawn down, and we all collect by the little
French window leading into the yard. The papers are taken round, and
unfolded. An enormous headline sweeps the page from end to end:

LA GUERRE VA DE MIEUX EN MIEUX.

Like most newspapers the contents are optimistic as regards their own
side.

Mlle Irma reads the news aloud. She begins with the heroic defence of
Liège.

As she reads, we hear the cannon booming, booming across the distant
wooded hills.

To judge from the printed page, the gallant little Belgians have
defeated the entire German army to a man. Several regiments have
already covered themselves with imperishable glory, notably the 11th
and 14th Foot. Albert is in the 14th.

A man named Desmoulins has rushed out of a fort and slain four Germans
with his own hands before darting back safely to shelter. The enemy’s
losses are enormous. I notice that in war they usually are. The Belgian
casualties are described as so small that they are, seemingly, scarce
worth mentioning.

“The chief losses,” reads Mlle Irma in her clear, pretty voice, “were
sustained by the 11th” ... a slight pause quickly slurred over, “and
the 32nd.”

“And the names!”

“There are no names as yet,” she returns quietly and goes on with the
notes of a speech, “ce cher monsieur Askveeth,” had delivered in the
English parliament only yesterday.

But Madame Job is not to be deceived. “It was the 14th which has been
so cut up,” she says, putting up her apron to her eyes and beginning to
cry again. “I know Albert is dead. Mon pauvre Albert in that terrible
Liège!”

“Don’t fuss, Maman,” says M. Alfred the peacemaker. “It will be all
right now the men in skirts are there....”




A TEUTON FEAST


_Friday._—Two men of the Brandenburger Cuirassiers come into the inn
before breakfast. I am brought forward, as usual, to interpret. The
shorter of the two, a square-jawed, swashbuckling kind of fellow,
demands hay. I reply with superb mendacity, “We have no hay.” He
follows this up with enquiries as to the disposition of the enemy. My
face becomes vacant, my German resolves itself into a fluent mass of
unintelligible sounds.

Woe is me! At that moment the door into the yard opens, and M. Alfred
is seen crossing the clean wide space, bearing stablewards half a
hayrick on a long pitchfork.

The Cuirassier gives a growl, thrusts his pug-nosed, underbred face
almost into mine, and lands me a blow that knocks me up against the
wall.

“Isn’t that hay?” he asks fiercely, pointing.

“Hay, but for us,” I answer calmly.

“You lie!” He prods at my left shoulder with his bayonet, but he
either fears to strike hard or the padded arrangement worn under my
dress with a view to such contingencies does its work well. My wound is
nothing but an abrasion of the skin.

The swashbuckler swaggers into the yard and coolly appropriates the
hayrick. His friend, a gentle-faced, blond giant looks down at me with
regret.

“You need not fear. I will see that you come to no harm. My friend
there is a wild fellow,” he murmurs apologetically.

“Fear. Ich bin Engländerin,” I answer simply.

He laughs. “You are as brave as your brave little army. But—such a
mere handful of men. How can it stand up against us!”

The swashbuckler returns. They leave the inn together and later
appear before the Gendarmerie with the weird medley of weapons which
every cavalryman seems to carry. They hammer at the stable door. It
is smashed and their horses feeding in the empty stalls in less time
than it takes to relate. Their next step is to batter at the door of
the Gendarmerie itself. I go to the back of the house whence a narrow
window commands a view of the place. Perfidious people! They have no
respect for the sanctity of home. The Commandant’s little treasures
are quickly found. They run from room to room, opening drawers and
rummaging through the contents, even overturning furniture. One man
gets hold of a pile of letters, tied with ribbon. Love-letters perhaps.

Downstairs they go and bring up a ham, bread, some wine. A
“_pique-nique_” in war-time is huge fun. They thoroughly enjoy their
impromptu meal in the back bedroom. The remains of food are left
scattered about the uncarpeted floors; some of it is trodden carelessly
under the soldiers’ feet.

Everything is tossed about as green hay in the harvest field. The very
sheets are torn from the beds and lie in little white ghostly heaps on
the dark-stained boards. The Brandenburgers come out into the street
where a row of stalwart bayoneting Cuirassiers are keeping order. My
nice blond giant has a huge cigar between his teeth, the Commandant’s
cigar, so has my swashbuckling bully.

They both lunch at the inn and fall to as if they had had nothing to
eat for the last ten months. I am made to translate and can scarcely
speak for anger. I suspect them of every crime.

_Saturday._—The blond giant comes in at all hours. Everyone in the
village likes him now in spite of his behaviour at the Gendarmerie.
He seems gentle, mild-eyed and very courteous. We have been used
to different treatment. He arranges everything so nicely, too. For
instance, he begs us all not to put our noses out of the houses after
twilight, under any pretext. “I can’t bear to think of your being
frightened; my sentries might make a mistake,” he says, smiling
pleasantly. The poor literal peasants don’t see that this is an
euphuism for shooting us on sight. Orders, no doubt.

_Sunday._—I get up early and go to Mass with Mlle Irma, having first
obtained permission from the soldiers. We walk along the sides of the
road, under the shadow of the trees, a wise precaution these days.
Osterre chapel is packed to the doors. I have a curious feeling that
those paint and plaster saints high up on their little pedestals are
alive. St. Antoine’s nose looks longer and more pinched than ever, and
he is gazing down as though ashamed to be of so little use to us in our
hour of need. St. Christopher is mild, so is St. Joseph; the Madonna
seems to smile at us with a modest kind of shrinking sympathy across
pots of flaming geraniums.

Osterre chapel is packed. The sheep-and-goats division of the sexes
appears to obtain in the Ardennes. The women’s side is over-crowded.
We could hang out “standing room only” and be merely truthful. The
men’s scarcely less so. All the women are as scrupulously neat in
their Sunday silk blouses and flower-trimmed hats as though they had
never heard of such a thing as war. One or two of the black-bonneted
old peasants are making their rosaries damp with tears. I can see the
beads, so brightly reflected against the polished wooden seats, shaking
a little. At the end of the service, a box like a newly opened sardine
tin, at the end of a long pole, is thrust before me by a tiny acolyte.
Then we rise and go home comforted. We have shifted the burden of our
troubles to other—wiser shoulders.




COALS OF FIRE


The Tax-collector is resting here for a few hours on his way home. He
has brought with him his son, who looks dead tired with his twenty-mile
walk. The lad’s luggage has all been left behind. But Aywaille was too
near Liège to be safe. The Tax-collector will be glad to reach his
journey’s end.

“All day long yesterday I watched the German troops march through the
town,” he tells me. “It was pitiable to see those columns of splendidly
equipped men, simply dropping from fatigue. Some could scarcely put one
foot before the other.”

“They are our enemies.”

“My sister stood in the street for hours, refilling buckets of water
from which the exhausted men swilled their necks and arms. She cut them
tartine after tartine until all our bread was gone and she could hardly
stand herself.”

“They are probably going down to shoot the peasants’ fathers, sons and
brothers in Liège,” I remark coldly.

“From my sister’s point of view, they are suffering and they are men.
That is enough....”

Compassion is evidently a Belgian vice!

Even Madame Job is breaking out in an unexpected quarter. She is
satisfied for the moment as to Albert’s safety, so I am surprised to
find her this evening occupying her favourite position on the lowest
step of the kitchen stairs with her blue check apron over her head.

Spasmodic snuffles under the cotton screen warn me what to expect. I
gently pull down the covering and stroke her face.

“We shall win,” I say consolingly.

At this Madame breaks down completely.

“Win? The poor, poor Prussians will be killed, all killed. There was
one so young to-night, with eyes so sad.” (Snort and snuffle.) “Have
they not also wives and mothers who will mourn their loss?”

I find no words in which to confute this obvious truth.

Madame soon revives. In her careful Walloon brain she has conceived
what she calls “_un plan_.”

“If I care for the Prussians” (I know she is hoping that heaps and
heaps will be brought in from the battlefield to test her word),
“perhaps they will care for my Albert should he be wounded in the
forts there below....”

I do not dare to tell her that the Belgians have themselves blown
up the Chaudfontaine forts and that her beloved Albert is doubtless
numbered with the dead....




IN DANGER


One of the Uhlans is quite communicative to-day. He shows us how the
patrols are worked. It is very interesting, but far too red-tapey. “In
twenty minutes,” he says, “I can summon a hundred and twenty Uhlans
to my aid.” To get them, however, he has to write on his cross-barred
paper his name, position, date, hour, regiment and extra details. This
human document he places in an envelope which also has to be addressed
and endorsed with date, hour, name, etc. Business-like but slightly
superfluous when the enemy’s patrols are almost on you. I pity the
Uhlan deputed to take the message.

The Cuirassier is in a soft mood this morning. He comforts Madame Job
with the assurance that no great battle can take place in the Ardennes,
where the wooded hills and valleys are ill-suited to such a scheme. He
ridicules our idea of hiding in the woods as being a fatal plan for
escaping the Germans. “You would be found and dragged out in a moment,”
is his reassuring statement. Later he turns to me.

“You do not fear the Germans, Fräulein?”

All the Uhlans ask me that. They seem so amazed that we do not scuttle
like rabbits at their approach.

“No, I am not afraid,” I answer.

“But you are in more danger here than my brother who is a prisoner in
Russia,” he persists.

I translate this to the family of Job, who all tearfully implore me, as
they have done a hundred times in the last week, to disguise myself as
a peasant and pretend to be one of them....

It seems a skulking thing for a Britisher to do. I can’t face it.

“You see, Fräulein, there are many spies. They have shot women as well
as men before Liège. There is short shrift for spies in war-time. You
are alone too. So much the more suspicious.”

“I must take my chance.”

“Stay in your room then.”

Stay in my room, indeed, when ten, twenty times a day my help is sought
in smoothing over difficulties, interpreting orders for the enemy or
the peasants. A likely plan!

A Cuirassier speaks of himself and the family he never expects to see
again.

“My five brothers are all serving in the army,” he says, “the sixth
is a prisoner in Russia. My two sisters’ husbands are soldiers too. My
father an engineer, aged sixty-five and in weak health, has also been
compelled to come forward and serve his country. My mother was like
that when we came away,” he passes the back of his hand across his eyes.

I begin to pity the German women nearly as much as I pity the Belgian
peasants. But then the former have suffered no atrocities—as yet.




MAPS AND MINES


One day I ask the Cuirassier why he has no markings on his shoulder
straps. He coughs, blushes, then unbuttons one and turns it back to
show a large N. surmounted by an Imperial crown embroidered in blood
red.

“The Czar was our Colonel, Fräulein,” he says, in the horrified accents
usually reserved for the mention of the Prince of Darkness.

The fact does not seem to me so awful. I hide a smile.

“Many of the men tore the straps off their uniforms before they would
go on active service,” he says seriously.

I ask him why he is such friends with the swashbuckler.

“One does not choose one’s comrades in war-time, Fräulein.”

He brings out a map which seems to have every fir tree and blade of
grass in the country accurately described on it and draws his finger
along the page until he comes to Namur.

“The French have blown up every bridge over the Meuse.” He indicates
the length of the river between Namur and Liège. “We shall build them
again.” He goes on to tell me facts about the countryside which I
thought only the peasants knew.

The network of patrols with which Germans enmesh the country so far in
advance of the body of the army, seems to have done its work well.

I translate to the Job family, who listen amazed.

The Cuirassier tries to pump me, very deftly, very innocently.

“Have you heard anything of the number of French in Namur. Have they
been strengthening the defences there during the last two weeks. Is it
true that their food supply is inadequate to the needs of the town?”

It is amazing how obtuse I suddenly become. I forgot that the
Job-Lepouses have dinned into my brain for the past fortnight the
pleasing legend that a hundred and forty thousand Frenchmen, not
to speak of Belgians, are defending Namur, and that every other
tree in the country side has been cut down to pile up barricades. I
swear I have no knowledge of the (possibly true) assertion that the
_avant-garde_ of the French troops, two hundred men and officers, are
at Laroche. I am duller witted all of a sudden than the village idiot
who has, by the way, refuted the charge of idiotcy by keeping mostly to
the fields since the Germans came.




IN THE BAR


Some infantry, I think they were Landwehr, on guard here to-day, were
quite distressed at the sight of weeping women and children. Later in
the day a little deputation of them waited upon me at the inn. “Would
you please go round the village, Fräulein,” they said, “and tell the
women and children that we mean them no harm? Have we not wives and
children too?” One of them opened his wallet or pocket-book and showed
me the photo of a pretty curly-headed German child. Needless to say, I
did go round and reassure the people. The result was that the Landwehr
were the richer that evening by the peasants’ last pots of appetising
home-made jam.

I have to go into the bar and translate in my bad German for the
soldiers. Yesterday some of the Uhlans’ horses, picketed in the village
street, put their heads through a front window of the inn. I was called
in by both sides to assess the damage. It was rather embarrassing,
especially as I had to make out the account in greasy German coin! The
Uhlans paid up at once, as usual, but the tender-hearted hotel-keeper
refused to ask anything approaching the value of the window. The
soldiers are annoyed with me sometimes for not being able to procure
them special kinds of German beer. Cognac is the drink they love, but
the officers have particularly ordered they shall not be served with it.

This business of barter and exchange is often very trying. I had a
terrible transaction to-day with a Prussian non-commissioned officer
over a box of cigars. It nearly turned my hair grey! We ultimately sold
it him for a franc. Anyway, I feel proud to have done my share towards
the annihilation of the enemy. A few drops of Prussic acid would have
been wholesome by comparison!




IN THE WOODS


_Monday_—Notices have now been posted up in all the Belgian villages
that, since the Belgian civilians, both men and women, have shot at the
Germans and even killed their wounded, anyone who offers the slightest
resistance will be at once shot down. The house to house search for
arms is rigorously prosecuted. A man in the village is shot to-day.
He was working in the fields and ran away instead of facing round and
throwing up his arms when challenged.

In one village, so the Germans themselves tell me, they have shot
twenty-nine men out of thirty-four. They assert that their soldiers
were fired on as they entered the street.

The Kaiserliche regiment is encamped at Malempré, a mile away. They
have taken an ox and one or two sheep and roasted them whole. They have
also forced the peasants to dig up their own fields of potatoes for
the soldiers and stood over them to ensure the order being carried out
at once. The Germans give a bit of paper, in exchange, a governmental
I.O.U. redeemable at the end of the war ... if there is an end and the
peasants are alive to see it!

“All will be paid,” says an orderly complacently, as he triumphantly
carries off our last fresh eggs. But what is the use of German money or
governmental I.O.U.’s when one cannot reach the town for fresh supplies.

“All will be paid.” What a mockery! Stay. They are right. All will
be paid. With more than money. With blood and treachery and women’s
tears....

I sat up all last night as usual. Paraffin and candles have long
given out, but luckily there was a thrice-blessed moon. In the queer
half-light, the sentries looked like so many demons pursued by their
own shadows. Soldiers were sleeping all about the hard cobblestone
street as though lying quietly in their beds at home. Only the
Cuirassiers under my window kept up a constant noise. Their horses,
too, were stamping and moving continually in the stables as though
anxious to get away.

This morning I ask one of the more kindly-disposed soldiers if he is
not afraid of death.

“I must do my duty,” he says simply. “But I feel the cord tightening
round my neck each day.”

He looks pale and pinched, as though disease, not rifle fire, would be
his end.

“I was out scouting in the woods last night, Fräulein,” he tells me
later. “It is so cold, so eerie, and then one only gets a couple of
hours’ sleep when the dawn comes. There are horrible things in the
woods, Fräulein—shapes and monstrosities. The pine dust powders under
the horse’s feet and the green boughs go “swish” in one’s face just
as one turns on the electric torch, thinking to have spotted a rascally
Frenchman——”

“—And you did?” I asked breathlessly.

He rubs a hand over his convict-cropped head and looks modestly
triumphant.

“Two, Fräulein. Both dead. Straight, clean shots. Couldn’t miss.”

I start up, trying to recall to an elusive memory my amateurish
knowledge of first aid.

The Cuirassier smiles. “Really dead, Fräulein. We could only find one.
I buried him very near the top because the ground was hard. Here is his
number.”

He compares it with his metal one, slung from his neck by a cord. A
brown leather purse is attached by the same means.

    “Wer spärrt in der zeit,
    Hat etwas in der noth”
    (Who saves in time,
    Has something in adversity [need])

is written on it in German characters.

Mlles Irma, Louisa and Rosa are all sitting round agape with interest.

“It’s quite like being at home,” says the blond giant smiling at us
complacently.

“This is the first time I have seen a German soldier unarmed,” I remark
sarcastically.

“What need when one is among friends,” says the German with emphasis.

Madame Job suddenly begins to grind the coffee-mill in the kitchen.

The peaceful Cuirassier instantly applies the now familiar revolver to
my forehead. The noise makes his expression change from mild melancholy
to fierce anger. He is capable of any villainy since he thinks we have
arranged an ambush of the French and that he is at last betrayed.

A speedy explanation frees me from my uncomfortable position. More
Uhlans ride up. At their head is a scholarly looking officer with a
pointed grey beard.

“The Prince of Meiningen,” whispers a soldier in a soft round cap, who
is passing by the door.




PRISONERS OF WAR


“Everything is bearable so long as there is bread,” said Sancho Panza.
I begin to feel I could reckon with the Uhlans if only we had enough to
eat. Between the closely-drawn shutters of the little village shop can
be discerned packets of chocolate in small, neat, silver wrapped rows.
I would sell my chances of seeing England again for two good sticks or
twenty centimes in solid nickel coin with which to purchase them.

For lunch to-day I have a tiny piece of black bread. I eat it
lingeringly, carefully putting in the Gladstonian forty bites.
Yeastless, heavy as lead, it seems the most delicious food. I am
compunctious for having eaten so much when I think that there are only
three more such loaves. These are carefully hidden behind the cellar
door. They will last us some time, and the Uhlans will not find them
easily. But so beautiful is the Belgian nature, I am sure Mdme Job
and the others would willingly starve themselves that I—and even the
Germans—might have enough.

A hush is on the village since the word is passed round that the Duke
of Meiningen has entered the Gendarmerie beneath the shadow of the
still waving flag. No doubt it will presently be pulled down, “by order
of the Kaiser,” and replaced by the Imperial Eagle. We shall see!

In the meantime all documents and money are taken possession of by
the Prince. He comes out and speaks to the soldiers with some show of
anger. I gather that the upheaval the interior of the Gendarmerie has
undergone is set down to our account.

We shall be punished unless I interfere. In crudest German I explain
that none of us has been within the doors, that the disturbance and
looting are the work of German soldiers, that we should not dream of
interfering with a Belgian Governmental office. My excuses are met with
grunts. But I can see that they believe me. We shall pay no penalty for
this. I breathe again.

A tin case containing documents and money is set in the roadway by the
Gendarmerie door. The street is as full of soldiers with bayonets as of
cobblestones. The Prince stalks over to the post office, his scholarly
face grave with thought. Prince Ernst, his brother, mounted on a
splendid horse, guards the door.

The family of Job is behind fast-shut windows. So is the rest of the
village. Tragedy stalks in the air. We wonder what M. le Précepteur is
doing and what is going forward inside his house.

Suddenly shriek upon shriek ascends. Madame la Précepteur is in
hysterics. Her husband is being killed without doubt. The shrieks
intensify to yells. They are joined by a sturdy howl from M. Victor
and a whimpering cry, more pathetic than either, from the little baby
Germaine.

Madame Job puts her handkerchief to her face and begins to cry.
Monsieur puts his fingers in his ears. Messieurs Alfred and Floribert
have disappeared. I stand irresolute.

The owner of the café next door ventures into the open, and gazes
across that phalanx of impassive, well-armed men.

“Mademoiselle,” she calls. I go to the door and slip back the bolt. I
am ashamed to say I still hesitate. It is not exactly fear, but what
can I do, of what use am I, even if murder is being done; I, a woman,
defenceless, alone?

“I must go if you will not,” she says, gazing at me like a piteous
sheep. I am startled into action. Across the road I slip, in front of
the truculent-looking soldiers and seize Prince Ernst’s horse by the
bridle.

“May I go in?” I ask, hating to be forced to appeal to the enemy in
this way.

Instead of ordering me back or insulting me as I expect, a look of
immense relief flashes over his face.

“Pray do, Mademoiselle,” he says in French. “The poor woman is in great
distress. At nothing, nothing at all.”

“She naturally doesn’t like soldiers entering her house and taking the
post office papers and money,” I say, noting the large tin box on the
pavement, matching in appearance the one outside the Gendarmerie door.

“That is not the reason,” returns the Prince, looking a little
uncomfortable this time, “she is troubled because he is taken as
prisoner.”

“Prisoner,” I say, stupefied.

“C’est la guerre,” he answers a little cynically, a little sullenly.

I turn away and stumble over the threshold.

In the sitting-room are the Prince, two officers, M. le Précepteur,
looking hot and sticky yet deathly white, holding Germaine in his
arms. Mme la Précepteur in a morning wrapper is yelling in accents
which make pig-killing seem gentle by comparison. Hanging to her skirts
is M. Victor, decidedly unwashed, but, mercifully, by now too short of
breath to cry effectively.

“Mon pauvre mari, mes pauvres enfants,” sobs Madame. Her face is purple
with emotion, the tears are coursing down her cheeks. She is a piteous
spectacle of unrestrained grief.

The Prince of Meiningen says to me in quiet tones the words every
German seems to use when in a tight corner.

“Es ist unsere pflicht” (It is our duty).

In front of M. le Précepteur is a little travelling-bag with a shirt
and a few collars. I think he would go on packing if Madame would not
insist on half-throttling him with her embraces every other minute.

“It will only be for a short time,” I say comfortingly to Monsieur le
Précepteur.

“Only for the duration of the war,” says the Prince.

“The duration of the war!” But I am determined to look on the bright
side.

“He will have nothing to eat,” moans Madame between her sobs.

“He will live well,” asserts the Prince patiently. He would take his
prisoner off at once, only he does not wish to precipitate more scenes.

Live well! What a mockery. The German soldiers have themselves told me
that the civilian prisoners only get bread and water during the term of
their imprisonment.

I remember the words of my Belgian friend, the Tax-collector, when I
asked him if they ever killed civilian prisoners.

“Kill them? No, indeed,” he said nonchalantly. “They give them too
little to eat. That is all.”

I go into the little kitchen at the back and grope in the cupboard for
bread and for butter to make tartines for M. le Précepteur.

An officer comes in and coolly appropriates some eggs in a wire-work
basket.

“Fresh eggs,” he says appreciatively.

“Will you leave the poor woman nothing?” I ask fiercely.

He sets them on the table one by one and slinks back to the outer room.

“Come,” says the Prince.

Half fainting, Madame flings her arms round her husband’s neck for a
last embrace, then falls back moaning into a chair. He kisses Germaine
and Victor, then walks out into the sunlight and looks round him, half
dazed. We shake hands, but with such a lump in my throat I cannot say a
word.

The postmaster, carrying the little brown bag, walks off in the
direction of Malempré between the Prince and his brother. The soldiers
form up behind. The procession is soon lost to sight behind the tree
trunks....

The Germans have quite a lust for prisoners to-day. After lunch the
word goes round that the Bourgmestre is being sought for. At first they
cannot find him. Perhaps he is hiding ... in a cellar ... somewhere.

Presently he is brought along. He looks shrunken and very white. Poor
man, I am afraid he has heard rumours of the bread-and-water diet. He,
too, is led off under military escort in the direction of Malempré....

At Grand-Mesnil they have already secured 12,000 francs from the Caisse
Communale. Gold-thirsty brutes!

There is a panic-stricken cry in the village. The worst has happened.
The beloved Curés are here, jogging along in a little armoured tumbril
such as those in which one pictured folk passing bravely to the
guillotine in revolution time of old. They suffer no indignity of
bound hands or bandaged limbs. The swarming lines of troops remove all
need for that.

A squad of soldiers march stolidly behind. Through the forest of
notched bayonets one catches a glimpse of weeping women. There are
other ways of fighting than with swords. The Curé makes the Sign of
the Cross and smiles down on the scared faces of the villagers. If his
voice would only carry he would say, like his divine forerunner, “Be
not afraid.”

We run weeping after the tumbril. It seems sacrilege to take the
Curé. Poor things! They have no seats, but are dexterously balancing
themselves on the top of the Gendarmerie tin boxes. To the lay mind
their attitude savours of the undignified. But in the good peasants’
eyes their Curé cannot be ridiculous....




A DISTURBED NIGHT


_Monday_.—It will be my turn next. The position is scarcely an
enviable one. We seem so unprotected in this little lonely Belgian
village between Liège, Namur, and the German frontier. Our few houses
extend along the high road too; we have no cover. The Gendarmerie is
next my bedroom window, its truculent-looking flag still floating out
in the summer breeze. It acts as a red rag to a bull to every Uhlan who
comes into the village. And the army, a great army, many army corps are
passing by to-morrow.

Often and often when things have looked black for us, I have longed to
suggest to the peasants that they should stow their danger-signal flag
tidily away in a drawer. But there are some things one does not say. I
am not sure, but I think, if I happened to have a Union Jack it would
be up alongside....

It is midnight. We are in the usual inky darkness, since paraffin and
candles have given out. A troop of soldiers ride up and hammer on the
door. No answer. The street is lined with sleeping men; but these too
make no sign. The soldiers are getting what sleep they can before their
onslaught on Namur.

Without making a tour of inspection I am pretty sure Madame Job and
family are in the fields, or the sheltering hooded _camion_. The
Germans bang on the door again and cry in rather tipsy voices, “Bier,
bier.”

I quietly prop a little furniture against the door and wait events.

They go away. At two in the morning another lot arrive. A half-hearted
crew, or with insufficient weapons, for the stout, barred door refuses
to give way under their stalwart blows.

Some Brandenburgers sally out of the Gendarmerie and ask in colloquial
but expressive German, “Why the ... something they are making such a
row.”

The intruders sulkily reply they want cognac, “and quickly too.”

The officers came to the inn yesterday and ordered that the soldiers
should not be served with cognac. It seems the spirit makes them mad.

There is plenty of cognac in the bar. They have only got to break in
and help themselves. I don’t propose to do a Joan-of-Arc turn and drive
them away from the enticing bottles.

But the Brandenburgers order them off.

“We have tried ourselves. There is no cognac in the inn,” they say.
“Only a Fräulein who is very tired.”

The soldiers ride grumbling away. Kind Brandenburgers!

Hardly has the noise of the horses’ hoofs died down than the ear is
assailed by new and more terrifying sounds. At first it is a mere
rumbling noise as of great carts creaking heavily along the high road
from Vielsalm. Nearer it comes. It might be a procession of traction
engines. Now it is like one continuous clap of thunder. As it rounds
the bend from Malempré the noise is positively deafening.

I put my head out of the window. I can see nothing but vast grey,
indeterminate forms, heralded by what I imagine are rows of innumerable
horses. If only the darkness would lift and one could see a little.
These awful cargoes turn off by the Gendarmerie in the direction of
Namur. The noise is like hell let loose. It does not require much
imagination to picture them as great siege guns being slipped through
to Namur under cover of the night....




THE PLOT THICKENS


At four o’clock in the morning I hear the familiar cry of
“Mademoiselle, Mademoiselle.” I am ready dressed in my Connemara tweed
suit. I rush out. The Job-Lepouses are hanging out of a back bedroom
window. They are bordering on frenzy at the sight of some Hussars
endeavouring to seize their horse and cart.

They implore me to stop the Germans committing such a theft. How can
I prevent these armed men from stealing the entire village if they
wish? Rather a thankless task from my point of view. However, I go into
the yard and translate the wishes of the Job-Lepouse family into very
careful German, adding a bitter comment of my own.

“It’s only for a quarter of an hour, Fräulein,” they say sullenly,
still harnessing the horse.

“Have you orders?”

Silence. Obviously they have no orders....

More soldiers are heard in the street. An orderly rushes into the
yard. “The army is coming,” he says.

The men leave the horse and cart and hasten away. The orderly turns
to us and asks for food. We bring out a few vegetables. He pays with
German money and the usual parrot cry of satisfied complacency, “Alles
wird bezahlt.”

He repeats again, “The army is coming.”

I ask, “Who are commanding?”

He replies, “All are here, all, all.” Then as an afterthought—“Except
the Crown Prince. He is at Belfort.”

“Wounded?” I ask. The rumour has even reached us here.

“No more than you nor me,” says the orderly as he goes smiling away.

This is quite a morning of excitements. We now have a General with his
aide-de-camp “drying” in the kitchen. They have been caught in an early
morning downpour. I wish the raindrops had been bullets! Every now and
again as the door opens I see him, standing by the stove, one hand
covering Madame Job with his revolver, the other applied to his back to
see his clothes don’t scorch.

Poor Madame Job. I know Albert, fried eggs, generals and revolvers are
playing a dreadful, fire-worky, Catherine-wheel dance in her tired,
frightened brain. For one second I have a sneaking, naughty sympathy
with the red-faced General. I know from experience he will have a very
watery breakfast....




THE MARCH PAST


Manhay seems alive with soldiers. Generals, colonels of cavalry
regiments and all kinds of magnificently uniformed beings whose precise
rank in the military scale I am too ignorant to determine, are riding
or driving up in motor-cars, some from Vaux Chavannes, others from the
direction of Vielsalm. They look so spruce and smart, especially a
colonel of Hussars in a head-dress resembling a diminutive brown busby,
who calls out orders in a deep, bass voice.

A whole team of horses is picketed in the village street, splendid
horses too. They are pawing the ground and neighing, longing to be off.
They will get their fill of battle soon enough, poor beasts! Their
pastors and masters confer at the street corner. They look picturesque
in their long blue military coats. A protective guard of honour is
massed in front of the Gendarmerie door.

Waves of excitement pass over us. A great personage is here. He drives
up in a beautiful car with an attaché whose banded grey-blue coat fits
to perfection. The horses are brought along. The mysterious General
(the soldiers speak of him with bated breath) mounts. His long blue
cloak, with its scarlet facings, falls gracefully round him. He holds
the reins in his well-gloved hands.

The entire staff, headed by the General, takes up its position
in a semicircular sweep at the corner of the street opposite the
Gendarmerie. The officers look the picture of arrogance. How I hate
them! We all crane our necks out of the window. The army is advancing!

Already they are coming round the bend of the road. We can see them as
they pass the corner by the château. At first the soldiers scarcely
detach themselves from the firwoods. Then they seem to be marching on
us in one solid block.

Few civilians get the chance to see an army, alien or otherwise,
marching down to battle. The sight is piteous, thrilling. The
imaginative must visualise ahead so many rotting corpses instead of
those lithe, strong men. Personality seems lacking in that endless
procession which comes streaming down the road with faces grey as their
dust-laden clothes, mechanical in their movements as so many clock-work
figures. Yet they look efficient, happy, fit.

A great ceremonial follows. The General of this vast army shakes
hands with the colonel of each regiment, salutes the captains and
lieutenants, and says some kindly word or two to each line of
on-marching men. It is wonderful to see the spirit his cheery phrases
put into their tired frames. They are no longer the envy of admiring
women on Potsdam parade, these men with sweating faces and stiff limbs,
but they are in good fettle none the less. One company has half a
cigarette and the men pass it from hand to hand along the line so that
each may have a whiff.

The soldiers are all jabbering away, odds and ends of Teuton
witticisms, too colloquial for me to understand, interspersed with a
fire of pleasantry at the expense of the peasants. They break out at
intervals into snatches of song, winding up with the inevitable “Wacht
am Rhein” and “Deutschland über alles.”

Although they do not march in step, “_les Prussiens_” advance in
such close formation that each little company looks like one huge
Falstaffian figure. The solidity of their Wellington boots is in good
contrast to the colossal blunder of the pickelhauben, the spiky metal
helmets covering their close-cropped heads.

The Kaiserliche regiment is here, dapper Hussars, regiment upon
regiment of infantry, also the Brandenburgers, well-mounted, grim of
feature, with their shoulder straps buttoned over to hide the Imperial
crown and embroidered N. of their Colonel-Czar. Here are some of the
Landwehr, too, homely, honest men who would far rather be working at
their civilian tasks.

The troops greet the General as they pass him by with great bursts
of “hoch” or “grüsz” rising in tempestuous outcries from myriads
of dust-dried throats. They are irrepressibly gay and certain of
themselves, but I think they are putting a good deal of faith in those
devastating guns which went through in the silence of the night....




ARRESTED!


I hear an imperious voice say, “Come down, Fräulein.” The blue-coated
attaché is standing beneath my window, backed by a guard of soldiers,
not in their spiked helmets, as usual, but in their soft round caps.

Needless to say, I hasten to go down. The moment I had feared all along
has come at last.

“Who are you?” he says, looking straight into my eyes as though trying
to read my very soul.

“I am an Englishwoman,” I answer.

“Dasz sieht mann gerade aus” (That is self-evident), he replies sternly.

“Do you speak English?” I ask, just to gain time.

“I know all languages,” he says stiffly, “but now we will talk German.”

“Very well.”

“What are you doing in Manhay?”

“I am here for pleasure.” Such an imbecile reply makes the attaché
glance at me even more suspiciously.

“Have you papers?”

“Yes.” I fly up to my room, fetch out a visiting card and a Lloyd’s
bank-book and take them down to him.

He turns them over. “This bank, I have never even heard of it,” he
says. “You come from London?”

“Yes.”

“Then you know the German bank——”

Here he utters some unpronounceable name.

“1 have never heard of it,” I say in my turn.

His suspicions increase. I have to answer every conceivable question
until I flatter myself I convince him, by my extremely naïve replies,
that I am not even intelligent enough to be a spy.

He dismisses the soldiers, but continues talking to me.

“If only the English had stood in with us,” he says regretfully, “we
could have swept the world together.”

I am silent.

He glances at my tweed suit. “I had ordered an Irish frieze just
like that,” he says in English. “I was starting for a holiday in the
Dolomites when the war came. Do you know who he is?” The attaché points
to the cloaked General with the scarlet facings. The suddenness of the
question takes me off my guard.

“Is it the Kaiser?” I ask.

“I shall not tell you,” he answers quietly.

“Then I may consider myself free?” I say presently.

He hesitates.

“Can’t you see I’m no spy?”

“I am not so sure, Fräulein. If you value safety you will keep within
doors while the army passes.”

For a time I obey this order. Then some cavalry come by. There is
excitement, a horse has bolted, someone is hurt. I put my head out of
the window for a moment.

Five minutes later the attaché returns.

“Es thut mir leid, Fräulein. I am sorry, but you are under arrest. My
Chief orders it so.”

My knees feel as if they were giving way. I give a horrified gasp.

“You have ten minutes to pack a few things, then you will be sent over
to Germany under escort.”

I run into the house and tell the Job-Lepouses. They instantly fear the
worst and are dissolved in tears.

It is the affair of a minute to stow a few necessaries in a suit-case.
Unfortunately I stupidly pack papers too. I have a mouthful of black
bread. Madame la Précepteur cries over me, so do the Job-Lepouses. I
shall never forget their kindness. Then the attaché returns with a
young officer.

I am placed in the charge of this man, an aviator it seems, by name
Lieutenant von ——. He, with an escort, will convey me seventy miles
along the main road to Germany.

“And then?” I ask with uplifted brows.

“If your papers are in order you will be free to remain in Germany
until the end of the war.”

“But I have no money, or scarcely any.”

A whispered consultation takes place.

The attaché turns to me. “If your papers are right the Lieutenant may
be able to arrange that you are immured in his Schloss.”

The magnanimity of the offer is lost upon me.

“I would rather scrub a doorstep,” I say, and bounce out into the
street.

It is rather alarming to advance under arrest in the face of a hostile
army. The officers at the corner by the Gendarmerie salute me as I
pass. I am too angry to bow. Neither have I the courage to look round
and settle the thrilling point as to whether the General with the red
facings is the Kaiser after all.

I climb with some awkwardness over the high sides of an armoured car
which is waiting in readiness with its soldier chauffeur some little
distance up the street. My escort get in and take their seats. The
infantry halting by the side of the road are almost falling over
themselves in their excitement to see a spy, a real spy. We are off at
a speed which would set a London policeman’s hair on end, in a wild
rush into the unknown.




“IT’S A LONG, LONG WAY——”


I sit inside that armoured car, balancing myself dexterously on the
top of my suit-case and begin to speculate as to how long I have to
live. The soldiers are clustered together at one end of the strong grey
vehicle; I am mercifully alone. Supporting myself on the top of my box
I peer over the sides and watch the advancing army as we pass. Mile
after mile flies by and still we are confronted by that endless sea of
faces. On either side of the road are wide devastated spaces where the
troops have encamped the night before. Once, in the centre of a wide
plateau, we see a biplane, her white wings gleaming in the morning sun.

“Mine,” says the Lieutenant, indicating the machine as he turns to me
with pride. We pull up and he gives an order to some soldiers near. Men
are being told off to guard the aeroplane. Spy mania seems rampant.
Perhaps they think I have the evil eye!

For seventy miles we drive on, now crawling to allow some soldier’s
frightened horse to get out of our way, now spinning along at a pace
that makes me dance about like a parched pea in the interior of that
steel-sided vehicle. During all that long, tortuous drive we pass
troops. I become obsessed with faces, jeering, smiling. I get used to
their peculiar brand of verbal humour. I try to look away from them and
prove myself complacent, superior. But escape is impossible. The entire
country seems to be merged in one huge, irrepressible Teutonic grin!

I long for an earthquake to swallow us all up, so deadening becomes the
effect of these continually marching troops. On they come, cavalry,
infantry, artillery, baggage waggons, Red Cross ambulances, caissons,
pontoons, on they come in a never-ending orderly procession. Every now
and again we pass the still steaming field-kitchens, mounted in carts,
each drawn by two horses, ready to supply the hot meal which every
soldier expects and gets. The men are fully equipped and fresh-looking.
They for the most part have not yet been shot over. At times a car
filled with officers dashes past. They direct quizzical glances at my
escort, as if enquiring what kind of cargo they have on board.

One incongruity in this well-drilled, magnificently equipped, steadily
advancing army. Behind a troop of cavalry, heading a mile or so of
well-filled baggage waggons, comes an old black “growler” drawn by two
seedy-looking horses. It might almost be a draper’s brougham taking
round millinery samples in a London street. The blinds of the carriage
are modestly drawn down. It may enshrine the Kaiser or the latest
patterns in soldier’s socks. History is silent.

We are going through Vielsalm, a frontier town. The pace is such that
I have a momentary impression of a steep street and curious silent
people. We are out once more in the open country. Germany, I suppose.

I feel, with the Brandenburger, that the cord is tightening round my
neck each minute. Fool that I was not to tear up my papers. A Russian
passport, an unsent telegram to an editor, some journalistic notes
about the war—enough evidence surely to warrant my immediate death. I
set my teeth and prepare my method of defence. I say to myself sternly,
“Keep your head and who knows if you may not still escape.” But in my
heart I have no hope.

We are approaching a town of size. The foot-paths are seething with
townsfolk who generously feast the soldiers as they pass through.
Vacant spaces on the paths are piled with a medley of eatables. The
housewives seem to have emptied the contents of their larders on the
pavements, even in the roads, for the troops to help themselves. We
nearly drive over an enormous pot of gooseberry jam. Many girls are
buttering tartines and offering the soldiers huge glasses of milk or
lemonade. Others have ready buckets filled with water for the heated
men to enjoy a cooling splash over face and arms. Some are ladling out
wine into thin-stemmed glasses. Flowers are thrown but not in quantity.
The troops need something more practical at a time like this.

We draw up at the station. I am delivered into the hands of the
Bahnhof Commandant, Colonel ——. He takes me to a café and sends for
the Bourgmestre. Across a red-clothed table I answer question after
question until my brain begins to reel.

I am frankly communicative. I admit that I am a journalist, that I have
a telegram, papers, etc. The Commandant will find them, anyway. It is
safer to confess first. He assures me that if my documents are in order
and I can give the address of friends in Germany to whom to wire,
matters may be arranged.

Friends in Germany. My heart sinks. I have none.

The Bourgmestre arrives at this moment. The Commandant draws him away
to a distant corner. They whisper together.

The owner of the café, a pretty, fair-haired woman, approaches.

“Mademoiselle is English and alone?” she asks.

“I am arrested as a spy,” I say.

“Espion? Pauvre Mademoiselle. Espion? Oh, la, la, la.” She wrings her
hands. The Bourgmestre beckons me to follow him. My sympathiser slips
away. I am led towards the town-hall by the Commandant, followed by
a large crowd. We enter and go upstairs to the Bourgmestre’s private
rooms. Someone brings in my suit-case. The contents are turned out on
the floor. The Bourgmestre and his companion rummage through them.
They secure much treasure-trove in the way of papers, including the
telegram. The Bourgmestre’s wife, a fine-looking, fair-haired woman,
takes me to an inner room. I am searched. “Es ist unsere pflicht,” she
says calmly when I protest. She finds my jewellery, some visiting
cards and a letter and takes them to her husband in an inner room. The
jewellery is returned to me before I leave.

“Sie schreiben furchtbar viel, Fräulein” (You write a fearful lot),
says the Bourgmestre, when I am brought back. He wishes he understood
English. So do I. Perhaps if he did he would let me free.

The Commandant understands a “leetle English.” Neither he nor the
Bourgmestre seem very shocked at my “incriminating documents.”

The editorial wire and some journalistic notes are fluttered in my
face. I explain away what I can and confess the rest! I do not confess
that, though no spy, I have a diary about the war concealed in my hair.
Thank goodness they have not found that yet.

Two more inquisitors arrive. If there exist such beings as Military
Governors of this German town they are “it.” Their close-cropped hair,
fierce mustachios and fiercer questions play havoc with my fortitude.
The third degree torture of America is child’s play by comparison.
They frown at me. They shout, jeer and yell. They thrust their fists
in my face and cry “Sie lügen, sie lügen” whenever I make some (as I
consider) specially apposite rejoinder. They question me for dreary
donkey’s hours, until question and answer seem to jig in my brain to
the tune of the soldiers’ feet as they march by outside.

“Where were you born?”

“I can’t remember.” (For the life of me I can’t.)

I am caught in a grey mist with the cannon booming in my ears again. I
feel faint. I am silent. Presently words detach themselves. I can still
answer my tormentors.

“Do you write?” they ask me maliciously.

“Yes.” What else can I say with that damning pile of foolscap before me.

“Why do you write?”

I try to evade a question which my conscience, my kinsfolk and even
some editors have often asked me.

“Have you a mother?” snaps one.

“Yes.”

“Why aren’t you with her?”

With this “have-you-left-off-beating-your-wife” kind of question I am
quite incompetent to deal. A holiday visit to a country inn is a form
of enjoyment no German could be made to understand.

The inquisitors fiercely smoothe out a map in front of me.

“Show us!”

I pass a trembling hand over that network of lines and names. To my
accusers, the second’s indecision spells conclusive guilt.

“La Roche. Here,” I say gently.

“Luxemburg. Ah!” They nod sapiently.

I draw my finger slowly along an infinitesimal space of map. “Then I
took the vicinal train to Melreux ... so ... and up to Manhay ... so.”

“Belgium!” They are shouting again, this time in tones of raucous
triumph.

For a moment I am at a loss to understand. “Manhay is in Luxemburg,” I
say.

They prod the map with the tips of their ill-manicured fingers. They
gesticulate. They rage. “Sie lügen, sie lügen,” they cry again.

“Luxemburg is written up on the wall in our little village street,”
I cry, trembling. So it is, but I forget that there is a Belgian
Luxemburg too.

“She is undoubtedly a spy,” says the fiercer of the two, twisting on
his heels and peremptorily addressing the Bourgmestre. His colleague
echoes sternly, “Undoubtedly a spy.” A look I do not like creeps into
the Bourgmestre’s eyes. The prison walls seem closing in on me. I see
myself already blindfolded, led out. I make one last effort.

“In England ladies do not spy,” I say.

My enemies glare at me with looks of such bitter cold contempt that
something seems to give way in my poor little overwrought brain. I
seize a handful of my papers, crumple them up and fling them full in
the face of my tormentor-in-chief. “England über alles,” I cry in a
voice that surprises myself. Then I sit down abruptly and listen to
the stertorous conversation which ensues between my foes. I single out
the word “gefangene” (prisoner) and gather that while the inquisitors
counsel my instant annihilation, the Bourgmestre has other plans in
view. I stagger to my feet. In a glass opposite I scarcely recognise
myself. I am white-lipped, haggard. There are great blue lines under
my eyes. I look the personification of guilt. Suddenly the two men are
in the corridor. I hear the Bourgmestre assuring them he will take me
under custody to Cologne and deliver me up as a prisoner of war to
the authorities. The door is closed, the key turned in the lock. I am
alone....

The Bourgmestre returns and bids me follow him. I meekly obey.
Presently I am having coffee at a table with his wife and a lady who
speaks a little English. My heart sinks again. It seems like a ruse.
They bombard me with questions. How impossible to explain a bachelor
woman’s point of view to the average German _haus-frau_!

The Bourgmestre turns briskly to his wife. “You have not looked under
her hat,” he says severely. I suddenly remember my diary and talk on
at random. I must think. I must gain time. My only chance is to feign
illness. I push away my cup and sink back in my chair. I am already
white.

“It’s nothing,” I blurt out as the Bourgmestre starts up. “Give me a
few minutes in my room.”

I stagger to the door, across the passage, into the little back
bed-chamber. The door is closed, the key grates in the lock. I remove
my hat, take down my hair and throw my diary in the jug of water.
Having pulped it well, I tear it quickly into small pieces. These I
hastily cram into my mouth and masticate and swallow as best I may. The
pulpy mixture has a horrible flavour, but it goes down—that is the
main point. I twist up my hair again and put on my hat. None too soon,
for the door opens and the Bourgmestre’s wife and her friend appear.

“Take off your hat,” they say.

I comply. I even graciously ask them to feel my hair. They both do so.
They are satisfied.

I show some notes to the English-speaking lady and fervently hope their
unspeakable stupidity will convince her of my innocence.

The Bourgmestre’s wife looks pleased. I admire her beauty, her fine air
of courage. If they only hadn’t such a dreadful sense of duty, these
Teutons.

“Es ist unsere pflicht,” they say.

She would have shot me herself, without a tremor, but she will be glad,
I believe, if my innocence is proved.




HOMEWARD BOUND


A little procession of housewives arrives at the town hall late at
night. I see them through the chinks of the door from the room where I
lie. “We have given our all to the troops,” they say, “we have nothing
to eat.”

“Nothing to eat.” So the German _haus-frau_ can be just as
compassionate as the Belgian peasant. I go to sleep in a comfortable
bed, locked-in prisoner though I am, and dream sweeter dreams than I
ever enjoyed in the little Ardennois village.

At four in the morning I am told to get up. My door is unlocked and I
am taken to the dining-room where the kind Bourgmestre’s wife gives
me breakfast. Her husband is in uniform. After surrendering me to the
authorities at Cologne he will rejoin his regiment. The wife speaks to
me with tears running down her cheeks as if I were an old friend. “It
is so hard, so very hard, Fräulein, that he must go. What will happen
to me and my three little ones?”

On the just or the unjust side, in war as in life, it is always the
woman who pays....

The twelve-hour journey to Cologne is uneventful. The Bourgmestre’s
manner has quite changed to me to-day. He is almost friendly. He puts
me on my _parole d’honneur_ if he leaves the carriage for a moment.
Needless to say I do not run away. Many people travel with us, mostly
men. They talk of brutal treatment accorded them by the French when
escaping from that country at the beginning of the war. Some speak
scornfully of the English. The Bourgmestre leans across and says
quietly: “I think you do not notice that we have an English lady in the
carriage.” There are instant apologies and smiles all round. I begin to
feel safe.

Cologne at last! The Bourgmestre delivers me up, suit-case and all,
to the Bahnhof Commandant. I say good-bye, thank him gratefully and
wish him luck. My escape from death is entirely due to his and Col.
——’s kind influence. The Cologne Commandant questions me a little;
another official asks me if I know a friend of his at “Tweekenham.” I
am delivered up into the hands of a brow-beating policeman who makes me
follow him through the traffic like a little dog. Finally he stalks
majestically into the hall of the Hôtel Kron Prinz, and, with a parting
“you are free,” leaves me to my own devices.

Free! Glorious word. I have not had a bath for three weeks, nor a good
square meal for the same period. I toss up which shall come first.
Bath wins. It is followed by a delicious dinner. The waiter brings me
the _Koelnische Zeitung_ and points out an illuminating article on the
iniquities of England headed: “Das Perfide Albion.”

After dinner I walk through the streets to the _Polizei_. Cologne
is a place you can get into with luck. But it owns a governor to be
propitiated if you wish to escape therefrom. I arrange for papers to be
signed. As I return late editions announcing German victories are being
sold by little girls all down the street.

The hotel manager tells me several English families lately staying at
the hotel have expressed their indignation with England for having
declared war!

I am up at an early hour and off to the _Polizei_, then the American
Consulate and back again. I feel I must get away before they rearrest
me. The Consulate is brusque. A young man in a khaki-coloured coat says
impressively that he is not sure about the passport. They have had
a wire this morning.... Something sticks in my throat and forbids me
to ask the wording of that wire. I hold out my Lloyd’s bank-book and
my visiting-card and I say I will wait until I see the Consul. Days,
weeks, months, are nothing to me. I can remain there for ever with
perfect equanimity. They begin to fear that I will. Presently I am
shown to the Consul’s room. He looks at me severely as I open my little
nest of papers.

“Very well,” he says; “but how am I to know you are the person you
claim to be?”

Apparently the only successful way to establish identity is to have
one’s name branded on one’s forehead.

For the first time, I burst into tears. England seems slipping away. I
can hear the Tax-collector once more, as he leans across the table and
says in his kindly, serious way, “You will never see England again,
Mademoiselle, make up your mind to that,” following on the words of the
Brandenburger Cuirassier, “You are in more danger than my brother in
Russia.”

The Consul ultimately accepts my word. He is kindness itself, and even
says he will come to my aid in the event of my being rearrested on the
homeward journey.

I leave the Hôtel Kron Prinz and wait outside the station for two hours
before the train is due to leave. I fight literally and fearfully
for—not a seat—but just standing-room. My first-class ticket procures
me a few inches of space in a first-class corridor where the squash is
so great that the surrounding faces touch mine and I cannot move hand
or foot. There are fifteen people in each compartment. The corridors
even are so full that men and women are standing in the lavatories.
The order is given to close the windows while we go over the Rhine. I
remember nothing more until I come to with my back against the wall
and my mouth sweet with the delicious odour and purifying feel of
peppermint. A kind German is popping little peppermint comfits into
my mouth. Blessed Teuton! We travel like that for hours. It seems
days. We have leisure to study the methods of the army of men working
at the fortifications outside Cologne. The express pants along at a
walking pace for a few miles, stops at a wayside station and fat market
women fight their way in and stick their bulging baskets—_faute de
mieux_—on our heads. One woman gets wedged in the lavatory door,
adding suffocation to the other trials of the poor souls within.
We arrive at Duisburg. The train will stop here seven hours. Seven
minutes I had understood previously. I alight. The peppermint-providing
Teuton and a charming German girl who has been already forty-seven
hours on the journey, take me in tow. We wander through the town, we
enjoy cream-laden chocolate, ice in a café, we speak of anything and
everything except the war.

At the station we admire the wonderful organisation of the Red Cross.
Then we dine together. An obsequious waiter brings the menu—in French.
A storm-cloud gathers on the faces of my two companions.

“Take it away. We don’t speak French any more,” he says roughly. We are
reduced to Wienerschnitzel and beer. I dislike both. The train comes
in bringing German wounded, all pale and very silent except one who is
able to stand on the platform and becomes instantly the centre of a
thrilled audience.

I offer my fruit to the silent, white-faced men who are making shift to
find comfort on the hard cushions. “Why not?” says one indifferently
reaching out his hand for the purple grapes. The others stare at me
but are seemingly past interest.

The train starts. Our first-class compartment is as full as before,
but instead of the beating sun, a blessed coolness has come to us with
the darkness. My German friend meets her mother at Wesel. They all
implore me to stay the night with them ... as many nights as I like.
I am touched but must get on. I may yet be stopped on the frontier.
Two soldiers, bayonets fixed, descend on me and demand papers. For the
moment I have mislaid them. A crowd collects. Spy-baiting is always fun.

There is decided depression when I produce my passport and the
Commandant’s papers. They let me pass. I enter the train for Goch and a
talkative guard comes to keep me company. He was in charge of the train
which has brought many prisoners through—thousands of French and only
two English so far. “And very glad the French are to be here out of the
fighting. They were all laughing as they came by,” he says.

At Goch I fall out. I can afford to sleep here, since I am in safety.
And sleep I do in a small wayside hotel.

Little old ladies regale me at breakfast with tales of “hideous
Belgian atrocities.” I catch a train to Flushing.

I hold in my lap all the way a French lady of eighty-six, who has
already been seven days in the train. I am desperately afraid she
will die in my arms. The rest of the carriage is filled with Japanese
fleeing from Germany after their declaration of war. For once I bless
their smallness of stature. They curl themselves up on the floor, in
corners, on hand-bags. I am sure if need be they would travel quite
contented in the rack. I notice their only European language is German.
When I address them in French and English they cannot understand.

I get on the boat at Flushing. It all seems too good to be true. Two
ladies plump down beside me and tell of their “terrible adventures,” in
leaving Germany. These harrowing tales resolve themselves into the loss
of some pretty frocks. It suddenly occurs to me that I too have lost
all my clothes.

Somehow the war had seemed more important!

The deck is a struggling mass of complacent Americans. The Japanese are
so small as to be overlooked. I am the only Britisher.

The Yankees survey our greyhound cruisers through their lorgnettes
with disrespectful enthusiasm and guess they’re “just sweet.” They are
enjoying the war with a delightful air of detachment. I envy them.
Even the thought of mines does not disturb their equanimity. American
subjects exploded by a mine. Impossible!

We arrive at Folkestone. Passports must be shown. Well-dressed
Americans crowd the companion-ways into the saloon. Men and women,
dressing-cases, floating veils. In between lurk the Japanese like
faithful little dogs. Meekly I wait last.

A stentorian voice roars out from the saloon.

“British subjects first.” My paltry triumph comes. I step briskly
forward and lay my passport before the purser’s critical eyes.

A moment later I fall ashore, almost into the arms of a stalwart
British bobby. Dear sweet soul. I could have kissed him.

London again. A hot bath, a good meal, a deep, sound sleep to the
hum of Piccadilly traffic, and I am ready to help. War is barbarous,
horrible, but there is a sturdy realism about it which is lacking in
our slug-slim, civilised life.


WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD., PRINTERS, PLYMOUTH

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ENGLISHWOMAN'S ADVENTURES IN
THE GERMAN LINES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
